                   GOVERNMENT OF THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA
                         CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD

APPEAL OF:

       RDP DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION and                     )
       642 H STREET, N.E. ASSOCIATES                       )
       LIMITED PARTNERSHIP                                 )
                                                           )       CAB No. D-951
       Under Contract No. DCFL 90-32                       )

       For the Appellants: Richard B. Nettler, Esquire and Stacy E. Costello, Esquire. For
the District of Columbia: Carol Paskin-Epstein, Assistant Corporation Counsel.

      Opinion by Administrative Judge Lorilyn E. Simkins, with Administrative Judges Cynthia
G. Hawkins-Leon and Jonathan D. Zischkau, concurring.

              OPINION AND ORDER ON MOTION OF THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA
                TO DISMISS THE APPEAL OR IN THE ALTERNATIVE FOR
              SUMMARY JUDGMENT AND TO STAY THE FILING OF THE RECORD

        On February 28, 1994, pursuant to Board Rule 110, the District of Columbia filed a
Motion to Dismiss the Appeal or in the Alternative, For Summary Judgment and to Stay the
Filing of the Record. The District requests that Appellants' appeal be dismissed for failure to
state a claim. In the alternative, the District requests that the Contract Appeals Board (the
"Board") grant its motion for summary judgment on the ground that the issues before the Board
were previously decided in the District of Columbia Superior Court Memorandum Opinion in
RDP v. District of Columbia, Civil Action No. 91-11402 (August 4, 1992) ("Memorandum
Opinion"), and affirmed by the District of Columbia Court of Appeals in RDP Development
Corporation v. District of Columbia, 645 A.2d 1078 (D.C. 1994). The District asserts that the
principles of res judicata and law of the case apply to this case.

        Appellants filed an opposition to the District's motion on March 21, 1994, and argued
that the Superior Court and Court of Appeals specifically declined to rule on the validity of the
lease-purchase agreement, reserving that issue for the Board's resolution.

       The Board heard oral arguments on the motion on September 13, 1994. Based on the
record and the oral arguments, the Board grants the District's motion for summary judgment for
the reasons discussed below.
                                                2                            CAli No. DoYSl. RDP Dev. Corp.




                                       1. BACKGROUND

       The following facts, taken from the Superior Court and Court of Appeals decisions, are
undisputed for purposes of this motion. The controversy between the District and RDP
Development Corporation ("RDP") involves commercial real estate, located at 642 H Street,
N.E. Washington, D.C. (the "642 H Street Property"); and owed by 642 H Street, N.E.
Associates Limited Partnership ("642 H Street, N.E. Associates"). RDP, a District of Columbia
corporation, is the general partner of 642 H Street, N. E. Associates. RDP, 645 A.2d at 1079.

        On July 19, 1990, RDP submitted a formal proposal to the District, offering to purchase
and renovate the property for the District to lease. On August 21, 1990, RDP submitted a
revised proposal which transformed the proposed lease into a proposed lease/purchase agreement
with an annual rent of $2,343,536. On October 4, 1990, RDP sent the District a commitment
letter containing the substantive terms of the proposed lease/purchase contract. Memorandum
Opinion at 2-3.

         On October 9, 1990, the Council of the District of Columbia (the "Council") introduced
the" Acquisition of Space Needs For District Government Officers and Employees Emergency
Act of 1990" (the "Emergency Act"), Bill 8-682, in order make the District of Columbia
Procurement Practices Act of 1985 ("PPA"), D.C. Code §§ 1-1181.1 to 1-1192.6, applicable
to the District's acquisition of leasehold interests. The Emergency Act would require for the
first time that the District employ the competitive procurement requirements of the PPA when
                                       *
leasing real property. See D.C. Code 1-336(h).1 Further, the Emergency Act would include
a provision making the Act retroactively applicable to any agreement not finalized prior to
October 1, 1990.      D.C. Act 8-264 was passed by the Council, but vetoed by then-Mayor
Marion S. Barry on October 25, 1990. RDP, 645 A.2d at 1079-80.

       Following the mayoral veto, on November 6, 1990, the Office of Corporation Counsel
and the Director of the Department of Administrative Services approved the terms of the



    I   Section 1-336 (h) provides:

                  The Mayor shall not acquire a leasehold interest in any building
                that is proposed to be leased for the predominant use by, or
                constructed for lease to and for predominant use by, the District
                government unless the procurement of the leasehold interest IS
                done pursuant to [D.C.Code] §§ 1-1183.3 and 1-1183.4.

       Section 2 of the Emergency Act also would require Council approval prior
to the appropriation, obligation, or expending of any funds to construct, alter,
purchase, or acquire any building or interest in any building that involved a total
expenditure in excess of $1,000,000. See D.C. Code § 1-336(c).
                                                 3                            CAB No. D-95/, RDP De,'. Corp.




proposed lease/purchase agreement. The proposed agreement was then submitted to the City
Administrator for her approval. On November 9, 1990, the City Administrator dated and
initialed a "Mayor's Decision/Information Form" as approved "thru" the City Administrator.
Id. at 1080.

       On November 13, 1990, the Council overrode the Mayor's veto, and the Emergency Act
went into effect immediately. Thereafter, the Council enacted the Permanent Act, which
included the provision making it applicable to contracts not finalized prior to October 1, 1990.
 On January 2, 1991, the last day of his term, the Mayor signed the permanent legislation (the
"Permanent Act"), which was identical in all material ways to the Emergency Act. 2 In its oral
presentation to the Board, RDP admitted that it was aware that the Council had enacted the
Emergency and Permanent Acts, and conceded that the proposed lease/purchase agreement was
not handled as a competitive procurement. (Tr. 14-15; 27).

       On November 16, 1990, the Mayor purportedly approved the lease/purchase agreement,
and shortly thereafter submitted a resolution for Council approval of the lease. On November
30, 1990, pursuant to the Mayor's request, the proposed resolution was introduced by the
Council Chairman as PR 8-545 and referred to the Committee on Government Operations. The
Council never acted upon the resolution. RDP, 645 A.2d at 1080.

       On December 31, 1990, the Mayor signed the purported lease/purchase agreement.                 l.d.:.

       Despite RDP's knowledge that the purported lease/purchase agreement did not comply
with the PPA's competitive requirements, on May 23, 1991, RDP requested the District to
execute an estoppel certificate which RDP's lender required as a condition to finance the
purchase and renovation of the property.~ Complaint, Exh. D. Between June 5, 1991 and July



    2D. C. Law 8-257 was introduced in Council and assigned Bill No. 8-645. The Bill was
adopted on first and second readings on December 4, 1990 and December 18, 1990,
respectively. It was assigned Act No. 8-342 and transmitted to both houses of Congress for
reVIew.


     3Under Paragraph 25 (b) of the lease, the District was reqliired to provide RDP, within
seven days after receipt of any request, a certificate which stated: "(1) whether this Lease is
unmodified and in full force and effect (or if there have been modifications, that the Lease is
in full force and effect and setting forth all such modification); (ii) whether there then exist any
defenses against the enforcement of any right of Lessor hereunder (and, if so, specifying the
same in detail); (iii) the dates to which rent and any other charges hereunder have been paid by
District; (iv) that District has no knowledge of any then uncured defaults under this Lease (or,
if District has knowledge of any such defaults, specifying the same in detail); (v) that District
has no knowledge of any event that will or may result in the termination of this Lease (or if




                                                                                                               ,.
                                                  4                            CAB No. 0-951. RDP Dev. Corp.




15, 1991, RDP wrote at least four other letters requesting that the District execute the estoppel
certificate. Complaint, Exh. E. The District never executed an estoppel certificate. RDP, at
1080.

        On September 5, 1991, RDP filed an action in the District of Columbia Superior Court
seeking temporary and permanent injunctive relief, specific performance, and damages regarding
the lease/purchase agreement. Id. at 1080.

       On September 18, 1991, the District sent a letter to RDP stating that the District
considered the lease to be invalid and unenforceable. Complaint, Exh. F. On September 27,
1991, RDP amended its Superior Court complaint by adding Mayor Sharon Pratt Kelly as a
defendant in its action to enforce the lease. (Civil Action No. 91-CAl1402). Complaint, para.
22.

      Eleven months later, the Superior Court determined that the provisions of the Emergency
and Permanent Acts applied to the lease/purchase agreement and that it was subject to the
competitive provisions of the PPA. Memorandum Opinion.

       Pursuant to the District's motion for summary judgment, the court also dismissed without
prejudice RDP's complaint in part, finding that the court lacked jurisdiction to make a final
determination as to the validity of the lease/purchase agreement, because RDP had failed to
exhaust its administrative remedies before seeking judicial review of the validity of the
lease/purchase agreement. The Superior Court noted that "[A]lthough both D.C. Code §§ 1-
336(h) and 1-1182.5 expressly invalidate a lease executed in violation of D.C. Code §§ 1-1183.3
and 1-1183.4., the exceptions set forth in D.C. Code § 1-1182.5 must be properly addressed to
make a final determination of the lease's validity." Memorandum Opinion at 10. Additionally,
the Superior Court decision left the issue of equitable estoppel for the Board to determine. 4




District has such knowledge, specifying the same in detail; (vi) the address to which notices to
District are to be sent; and (vii) such other information as maybe reasonably requested."

     4Judge Steffen Graae noted that: "Plaintiff also argues that if either Act applies to the lease,
the District either waived the competitive procurement requirement or is estopped from raising
the requirement as a means of invalidating the lease." The court indicated that it took no
position with respect to the waiver or estoppel arguments of appellant, since the issue of whether
the lease is invalidated by the Emergency or Permanent Acts was not before the court.
Memorandum Opinion, ftn 2, at 2. Accordingly, we do not agree with the District's contention
that the only issue before the Board is whether appellant met the requirements of D.C. Code §1-
1182.5(d)(l). The Memorandum Opinion did not address the equitable estoppel issue, since
examination of that issue would have led the Court to address the ultimate validity of the
purported lease/purchase agreement.



                                                                                                      cJ.31
                                                5                            CAR No. D-951, RDP Dev. Corp.




        On October 21, 1992, asserting that it was futile to appeal to the Department of
Administrative Services (DAS), RDP requested that the Board hear its appeal without a prior
filing with the Director of DAS. On May 13, 1993, the Board concluded that exhaustion of
administrative remedies (i.e. filing with the Director of DAS) was required as a condition
precedent to filing an appeal with the Board, and accordingly dismissed the claim without
prejudice. See RDP Development Corporation, CAB No. D-928, June 10, 1994,41 D.C. Reg.
3416.

        On July 1, 1993, RDP submitted its claim against the District to the Director of DAS,
pursuant to D.C. Code § I-II88.5(a). The Director failed to decide the claim by the statutory
deadline of September 29, 1993. On December 28, 1993, RDP appealed the Director's "deemed
denial. "

        RDP's complaint asserts five theories of relief against the District. The theories are: (1)
breach of contract; (2) estoppel; (3) anticipatory breach of the lease/purchase agreement; (4) that
the competitive bidding requirements do not apply here; and (5) that even if the competitive
bidding requirements apply, the good faith and substantial compliance of the parties validated
the lease/purchase agreement.

        The Court of Appeals affirmed the trial court's decision in the Memorandum Opinion and
also directed the Board's attention to the issue of whether there was good faith and substantial
compliance by the parties, which is where we begin our analysis. The Court of Appeals wrote:

               In ruling that it was without jurisdiction to consider whether the
              lease/purchase agreement was valid, the trial court properly cited D.C.
              Code § 1-1182.5(d)(l), which provides that "a contract which is entered
              into in violation of this chapter or the rules and regulations issued
              pursuant to this chapter is void, unless it is determined in a proceeding
              pursuant to this chapter or subsequent judicial review that good faith has
              been shown by all parties, and there has been substantial compliance with
              the provisions of the chapter and the rules and regulations." (Emphasis
              added.). . . Thus, the claims involved in RDP's action against the
              District, though originally cognizable in the Superior Court, also involve
              issues which "require[] resolution of an issue within the special
              competence of an administrative agency." Drayton, supra, 462 A.2d at
               1118 (citations omitted). The trial court, therefore, properly retained
              jurisdiction to determine whether the competitive bidding provisions
              applies (sic), while it correctly dismissed that portion of RDP's action
              which addressed the validity of the lease/purchase agreement.

RDP, 645 A.2d at 1083-84.
                                                                  •
                                                    6                        CALI No. D-951. RDP Dev. CO/po




                                        II. DISCUSSION

         In order for the Board to grant a motion for summary judgment, the District must
demonstrate that there is no genuine issue of material fact. The District must prove that it is
entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Super Ct. Civ. R. 56(c); Clyburn v. 1411 K Street,
Ltd. Partnership, 628 A.2d 1015, 1017 (D.C. 1993). To counter such a showing, the opposing
party must present evidence, via affidavit or otherwise, "to demonstrate the existence of a
genuine issue for trial." Racskauskas v. Temple Realty Co., 589 A.2d 17,25 (D.C. 1991). The
evidence must be viewed in the light most favorable to the party opposing the motion, with all
favorable inferences accorded to that party. Beard v. Goodyear Tire & Rubber Co., 587 A.2d
195, 198 (D.C. 1991). "Thus a motion for summary judgment is properly granted where the
pleadings, depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on file, together with the
affidavits, show that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the moving party
is entitled to judgment as a matter of law." Karen O'Donnell v. Associated General Contractors
of America, 645 A.2d 1084, at 1095 (D.C. 1994), citing Byrd v. Allstate Ins. Co., 622 A.2d
691 (D.C. 1993).


                  A. GOOD FAITH AND SUBSTANTIAL COMPLIANCE

        The District argues that the Board should either dismiss the complaint or in the
alternative grant the motion for summary judgment, asserting that there was no compliance with
the provisions of the PPA vis-a-vis the purported lease-purchase agreement. Neither the
District's written motion nor oral argument addresses the issue of good faith. Instead the
District challenges whether there was substantial compliance with D.C. Code §§ 1-1183.3 and
1-1183.4. RDP responds that the Board should deny the motion for summary judgment, because
the negotiations and memoranda from the Director of DAS, the Corporation Counsel and the
Mayor satisfied the requirements of good faith and substantial compliance with the PPA. While
RDP admits that there was no compliance with the competitive bidding procedures of the PPA,
it claims that the District treated the purported lease/purchase agreement as a sole source
procurement authorized by D.C. Code § 1-1183.3. 5



    5In its opposition, appellant maintains that:

                [T]he difficulty with analyzing this agreement between RDP and
               the District of Columbia lay in the fact that the agreement was a
               lease/purchase agreement. While the Council may have intended
               the competitive bidding requirements to be expanded to apply to
               leases, assuming the provisions are valid, it did not intend those
               provisions to apply to the purchase of real property.... Real estate
               purchases are traditionally sole source procurements.
                                                       7                             CAB No. 0-951. RDP Dev. Corp.




             D.C. Code § 1-1183.3 authorizes sole source procurements if the Director of DAS
      determines in writing that:

                     (1) Specifications cannot be prepared that permit an award on the
                     basis of either the lowest bid price or lowest evaluated bid price;

                     (2) There is only 1 available source;

                     (3) There is an unanticipated emergency which leaves insufficient
                     time to use this method; or

                     (4) There is some other reason in the best interest of the District
                     government which is so compelling as to use I of the other
                     authorized methods [including sole source].

         The procurement regulations at 27 DCMR § 1700 et~, require detailed and exacting steps
      and safeguards to be undertaken before the District enters into a sole source agreement, because
      sole source procurements are not a favored method of procurement. 6 Section 1700.2 of 27
      DCMR provides:

                     In each instance where the sole source or emergency procurement
                     procedures set forth in this chapter are used, the contracting officer
                     shall do the following:

                    (a) Prepare a written determination and findings ("D&F")
                    justifying the procurement which specifically demonstrates that
                    procurement by competitive sealed bids or competitive sealed
                    proposals is not required by the provisions of the Act of this title;
                    and

                     (b) Ensure that all of the steps required under this chapter for the



      The Board cannot address appellant's argument that the Council did not intend to include
      lease/purchase agreements under the Emergency and Permanent Acts, because that issue has
      been resolved by the Court of Appeals against RDP.

         6   See 27 DCMR 1701.1 which provides that:
./,
                     Each contracting officer shall take reasonable steps to avoid using
                     sole source procurement except in circumstances where it is both
                     necessary and in the best interests of the District.
                                         8                                    CAR No. D-951. RDP Dev. Corp.




            justification, documentation, and approval of the procurement are
            completed before the contract is awarded.

27 DCMR § 1705 provides:

            1705.1 When a sole source procurement is proposed, the
            contracting officer shall prepare a written determination and
            findings ("D&p") that sets forth the justification for the sole
            source procurement. If the procurement is in excess of twenty-five
            thousand dollars ($25,000), the D&F shall be approved by the
            Director in accordance with §101O.2a of chapter 10 of this title.

            1705.2        Each    sole       source   D&F   shall   include      the
            following:

            (a) Identification of the agency and specific identification of the
            document as a sole source D&F;

            (b) The nature or description of the proposed procurement;

            (c) A description of the requirement, including the estimated value
            or cost;

            (d) A specific citation to the applicable provisions of §305 (a) of
            the Act and this chapter that provide legal authority for the sole
            source procurement;

            (e) An explanation of the unique nature of the procurement or
            other factors that qualify the requirement for sole source
            procurement;

            (t) An explanation of the proposed contractor's unique
            qualifications or other factors that qualify the proposed contractor
            as a sole source for the procurement.

            (g) A determination that the anticipated costs to the District will be
            fair and reasonable;

           (h) A description of the market survey conducted and the results,
           or a statement of the reason why - a market survey was not
           conducted, and a list of the potential sources contacted by the
           contracting officer or which expressed, in writing, an interest in
           the procurement; and
III) III

"II'
,
    'I'
'.II ,
"ll"
  I I   ,
        I




                                                     9                                   CAli No. D-95J. RDP De.'. CO/po




                           (i) Any other pertinent facts or reasons supporting the use of a sole
                           source procurement.

                     While RDP claims that the lease/purchase negotiations complied with the spirit of the
            PPA's competition requirements, it has failed to support that claim with substantial evidence.
             It is undisputed that there was no compliance with the PPA's competitive requirements. RDP
            has made no more than general and unsubstantiated assertions that it can prove that there was
            substantial compliance with the sole source provisions of the procurement laws. 7 Moreover
            by its own admission, the requirements for a sole source procurement were not met. (Tr. 30).

                     The District has shown and RDP concedes that neither the Director of DAS nor any other
            official made the required determination that a sole source procurement was in the District's best
            interest or necessary (27 DCMR § 1701.1.) Nor is there any evidence that the nine required
            D&F elements were ever satisfied. Substantial compliance with the PPA cannot exist without
            a more explicit demonstration of these elements. Therefore, by demonstrating that a properly
            executed D&F did not exist with the required determinations, the District established that there
            was a lack of evidence to support the appellant's case. "If a moving defendant has made an
            initial showing that the record presents no genuine issue of material fact, then the burden shifts
            to the plaintiff to show that such an issue exists .... The defendant's initial showing can be made
            by pointing out that there is a lack of evidence to support the plaintiff's case." (citations
            omitted). Beard v. Goodyear Tire & Rubber Co., 587 A.2d 195 at 198.

                    Nothing in RDP's unsupported allegations, lawyer's arguments and unverified complaint
            raises any genuine issues of material fact. Counsel for the appellant submitted no affidavits to
            the Board, or came forward with other evidence of record to establish a material issue of fact.
            See Super Ct. Civ. R. 56 (e).8 Viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to the
            appellant, the Board determines that the purported lease/purchase agreement does not



                7Neither the documents attached to RDP's complaint, nor subsequent filings include copies
            of memoranda from the City Administrator, the Director of DAS or the Corporation Counsel.
            The Board is therefore unable to evaluate their content. See, however, the Board's discussion
            of the effect of the memoranda's issuance dates in section B. Equitable Estoppel herein.

                8S upe r.Ct.Civ.R.56(e) provides in part:

                   When a motion for summary judgment is made and supported as provided
                   in this Rule, an adverse party may not rest upon the mere allegations or
                   denials of the adverse party's pleading, but the adverse party's response,
                   by affidavits or as otherwise provided in this Rule, must set forth specific
                   showing that there is a genuine issue for trial. If the adverse party does
                   not so respond, summary judgment, if appropriate, shall be entered
                   against the adverse party.
                                                10                           CAR No. D-951. RDP Dev. Cotp.




substantially comply with the law and regulations. No genuine issue of material fact exists that
purported lease/purchase agreement substantially complied with the PPA's competitive
requirements or limited sole source exceptions.

                                 B. EQUITABLE ESTOPPEL

        The Board must also determine whether appellant's equitable estoppel claim can withstand
the District's motion for summary judgment. RDP asserts that the Government should be
equitably estopped from claiming that no contract exists, because of the conduct of the
government during the course of the negotiations and thereafter. 9          RDP's argument is
insufficient as a matter of law for the following reasons.

         First, the government cannot be bound or estopped by the unauthorized acts of its agents
  (even if one of those agents is the Mayor). See Chamberlain v. Barry, 606 A.2d 156 (D.C .
. 1992). The authority of a government official to contract is a prerequisite to the formation of
  a contract. In order to prove its case, RDP must demonstrate that the government officials
  whose actions it relied upon had authority to bind the government. The trial court resolved this
  issue when it found that the Mayor lacked authority to enter into this lease/purchase agreement.
 This fact cannot be relitigated having been settled by the trial court, and affirmed by the Court
 of Appeals. In its Memorandum Opinion, the Superior Court held that Mayor Barry lacked
 authority to approve the lease, because the competitive bidding requirements of the PPA had not
 been satisfied. Memorandum Order at 6. The Mayor's lack of authority to enter into this
 lease/purchase agreement cannot be relitigated before the Board because of principles of res
 judicata and collateral estoppel. Goldkind v. Snider Brothers, 467 A.2d 468 (D.C. 1983).
 Principles of equity cannot be used to create a valid contract from an arrangement which violates
 statutory and regulatory mandates, or create a contract that otherwise would not exist. Pacific
 Gas & Electric v. United States, 3 CI. Ct. 329, 340 (1983), aff'd, 738 F.2d 452 (Fed.
 Cir.1984).

        Second, we conclude as a matter of law that RDP could not prevail on an equitable
estoppel theory even if the statutory prohibition did not exist. To assert an estoppel against the
District effectively, RDP must establish that the District made a promise; that RDP suffered
injury due to reasonable reliance on the promise; and that the promise must be enforced to
prevent injustice and protect the public interest. District of Columbia v. McGregor Properties,
479 A.2d 1270,1273 (D.C.1984); Landow v. Georgetown-Inland West Corp., 454 A.2d 310,
314 (D.C. 1982). In addition, the party asserting the estoppel must demonstrate that the
government officials whose actions it relied upon had authority to bind the government. See City



    90n October 7, 1994, the Board received and has considered Appellants' Supplemental
Memorandum in Opposition to Motion of the District of Columbia to Dismiss the Appeal or in
the Alternative for Summary Judgment, in which RDP advanced with more detail its equitable
estoppel argument.
                                                 II                           CAR No. D-951. RDP Dev. Corp.




 of Alexandria v. United States, 737 F.2d 1022 (Fed.Cir. 1984).

          Even if we could reach the merits, Appellant's claim of equitable estoppel would fail for
  several reasons. First, RDP cannot satisfy the element of reasonable reliance as a matter of
  law.     RDP indicates that it relied upon signed memoranda from the Director of DAS, the
  Corporation Counsel, and the City Administrator attesting to the legal sufficiency of the
  proposed lease/purchase agreement. However, this reliance was manifestly unreasonable. As
  the undisputed facts demonstrate, the memoranda of the Director of DAS, the Corporation
  Counsel and the City Administrator were all signed after the Mayor had vetoed the Emergency
  Act (October 25, 1990), but prior to the Council override of the veto (November 13, 1990).
  Those memoranda were based on the assumption that the PPA competitive provisions did not
  apply. 10 That assumption was untenable after the Council voted to override the Mayoral veto.
  H was unreasonable for RDP to rely on those memoranda, following the Council's action. When
  the Mayor signed the purported lease/purchase agreement on December 31, 1990, RDP could
  not reasonably believe that it had a valid contract with the District. A person making a contract
  with the District is "charged or imputed with knowledge of the scope of the agency's authority."
  Coffin v. District of Columbia, 320 A.2d 301, 303 (D.C. 1974). The Council abrogated the
. authority of the executive branch to enter into this contract without complying with the
  competitive procedures of the PPA. RDP cannot shift the responsibility to the District and say
  that the District led it on, when it admittedly knew of the Council action to override the Mayoral
  veto.

                               C. OTHER CAUSES OF ACTION

        RDP's other causes of action advanced in its complaint must also fail. The Court of
 Appeals found that it was undisputed that the parties had failed to satisfy the competitive bidding
 requirements which voided the District and RDP's direct efforts to enter into the lease/purchase
 agreement. The appellant has therefore advanced no theory which supports the existence of an
 express contract between RDP and the District. The Board finds as a matter of law that the
 purported lease/purchase agreement is void ab initio, and that RDP's causes of action for breach
 of contract and anticipatory breach must fail. .




    InThe lease/purchase agreement was not resubmitted to the Director of DAS, the Corporation
 Counsd and the City Administrator for signature after the Council's veto override.
                                           12                        CAR No. D-95/. RDP Dev. Corp.




                                   III. CONCLUSION

      For the reasons set forth above, the Board GRANTS the District's motion for summary
judgment. Appellant's claim is hereby DISMISSED WITH PREJUDICE.

      SO ORDERED.



DATE: October 24, 1994           d..'L~~
                                 ~.SIMKINS
                                  Chief Administrative Judge



CONCUR:




~a.¢4.~~
 YNTHIA G. HAWKINS-LEON
Administrative Judge
:   I       II
        ,   III1
    I        II, ,




                                       •
                                  ~ouernment    of tlte l1listrirt of illolumbia
                                             CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD
                                              717 14TH STREET, N.W., SUITE 430
                                                   WASHINGTON. DC 20005

                                                                                       12021727-6597




                                                                       DATE: October 24, 1994




                       TO:        Richard B. Nett1er, Esquire
                                  1801 K Street, N.W., Suite 1200
                                  Washington, D.C.  20006

                                  Carol Paskin-Epstein
                                  Assistant Corporation Counsel
                                  441 4th Street, N.W., 6th Floor
                                  Washington, D.C. 20001


                       SUBJECT:   CAB No. D-951, Appeal of RDP Development Corporation and
                                  642 H Street, N.E. Associates Limited Partnership


                           Attached is a copy of the Board's opinion in the above-
                      referenced matter.




                                                                                 k       ~ .. Jtj.~tL~vr0/0Y}N
                                                                                 Rose M. G1111son       7' C
                                                                                 Clerk to the Board




                     Attachment

                     RMG/mjh
