                  GOVERNMENT OF THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA
                         CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD

APPEAL OF.

        A S McGAUGHAN, CO , INC                                )
                                                               )       CAB No. D-926
       Under Contract No. 87-0038-AA-2-0-LA                    )

                         <
      For the Appellant, A. S. McGaughan, Co., Inc.. Robert J. Sciaroni, Esq For the
Government. Martin D. Beck, Assistant Corporation Counsel

      Opinion by Administrative Judge Matthew S Watson, with Chief Administrative
Judge Lonlyn E. Simkins and Administrative Judge Jonathan D. Zischkau, concurring

                                             OPINION

        This appeal presents a claim1 for $24,839 10 of additional costs incurred to repair an
electrical duct bank which sustained damage allegedly as a result of a third-tier
subcontractor's reliance on information claimed by a second-tier subcontractor to have been
received from a District inspector that there were no live electric circuits within the duct
The information proved to be erroneous. We deny Appellant's appeal

                                         BACKGROUND

        Appellant, A,S McGaughan Company, Inc. ("McGaughan" or "Appellant") entered
into a contract with the District of Columbia Department of Public Works ("DPW") in the
total amount of $30,725,000 00 which included, among other items, removal or relocation
of sub-surface electric utilities and construction of two utility tunnels traversing the site of
the Blue Plains Wastewater Treatment Plant ("the facility")

        Within the path of the planned utility tunnels were existing underground electric
utility duct banks. Removal of these existing electric duct banks was required in order to
proceed with excavation for the tunnels to be constructed. Although some of the duct banks
to be removed were unused, certain of the duct banks contained high voltage electric lines
which were still energized.

        1
         The original Complaint included 31 separate claims for equitable adjustments contained in
paragraphs 6-27 of Appellant's Complaint The parties settled all but the subject claim and appellant
withdrew all claims except for the claim alleged in paragraph 27 of the Complaint Notice of Paitial
Dismissal filed June 7, 1993
                                            -2-                A S McGaughan, Co Inc , CAB No D-926


        During the entire period of contract performance, the facility continued in full
operation, with utility service maintained without interruption. Previously abandoned utility
structures could be demolished at any time. The Contract obligated Appellant to protect all
active utility structures, whether they were to remain in place or to be relocated, and, to
maintain the operation of the utility structures to be relocated until the replacement structures
were built Only after the contractor had completed the new utility structure would the
electric service be moved, and the utilities switched from the existing lines to the new lines
without interruption. The contractor was not authorized the demolish the original utility
structures until the new electric lines were energized and the replaced electric lines
deenergized.. The contract drawings indicated which electric lines were to remain in place,
which were to be relocated, and which, although present on the site, had been previously
deenergized and abandoned. The damaged duct bank was shown in the drawings as
containing electric lines to be relocated.

      In order to perform the contract, McGaughan subcontracted with Len Parker
Mechanical and General Contractors, Inc. ("Len Parker") for civil and mechanical work.
Len Parker further subcontracted with John J. Kirlin, Inc ("Kirlin") to install a temporary
24-inch water dilution- line. Kirlm, in turn, subcontracted with Gebhardt, Inc ("Gebhardt")
to perform the excavation and backfill for the temporary water line McGaughan
subcontracted all of the electrical work to John Miller Electric Co., Inc. ("Miller Electric")

       The District had three inspectors on site, each of whom had a particular trade
specialty. John Piagno was the senior resident inspector and supervisor, as well as the
plumbing and piping specialist, Elvin Lewis was the electrical specialist, J Alberto
Morales was the civil and mechanical specialist The three on-site inspectors reported to
James Ward, the DPW Project Manager. In addition, certain senior personnel of the
District's former Water and Sewer Utility Administration ("WASUA") had responsibilities
which interfaced with the contract performance. Dal C Van Dolsen, Branch Chief of the
water treatment facility's Electrical Maintenance Branch, was responsible for de-energizing
and energizing electrical circuits

       On February 16, 1988, while excavating for the water line, Gebhardt personnel
encountered a concrete obstruction which appeared to be an electrical duct bank The
excavation personnel could not determine with certainty from the exterior of the obstruction
what the concrete encased, and, if it contained electrical wiring, whether that wiring was live
or abandoned. Gebhardt immediately stopped excavation. The Gebhardt Field Supervisor
contacted the supervisor for the next tier contractor, Kirlin, who in turn contacted the on-site
District inspectors. Only the civil and mechanical specialist was on site at that time
                                             -3-                AS McGaughan, Co Inc, CAB No D-926

        Although the parties disagree as to what transpired thereafter, for the purposes of this
decision, the Board accepts the facts as stated by Appellant's witnesses. The Kirlin foreman
and Mr Morales, the District's civil and mechanical inspector, reviewed the contract and
as-built drawings of the facility which were located in the inspector's office. Neither the
Kirlin foreman nor Mr. Morales consulted Miller Electric, the Appellant's electrical
subcontractor, or Mr Van Dolsen, the facility employee responsible for de-energizing and
energizing electric lines. Appellant alleges that Mr. Morales advised the Kirlin foreman
that the duct bank which had been uncovered was abandoned and could be demolished
immediately. That information proved erroneous Although there is conflicting evidence
as to what the inspector advised, there is no dispute that the duct bank was actually in use
at the time. When Gebhardt personnel began the demolition of the duct bank, they struck
a high voltage electric line causing an explosion.

       On September 5, 1990, McGaughan filed a claim for an equitable adjustment under
the Changes Clause of the Contract to compensate it for the cost of repairing the damage
caused to the duct bank as a result of the explosion. (Appeal File ("A.F ") 4 3) By letter
dated November 5, 1990, the Alternate Contracting Officer denied the claim. (A F 3 1).
McGaughan appealed the denial to the Department of Administrative Services ("DAS")
Based on a written-presumption of denial issued by the Director of DAS, pursuant to 27
DCMR §3806,6, the contractor filed this appeal.2

                               POSITIONS OF THE PARTIES

       Appellant contends that "the District's inspector viewed the site and informed
McGaughan's sub-subcontractor that the existing utility was out-of-service and could be
removed. McGaughan and its sub-subcontractors followed the normal procedure for
ascertaining whether the utility was in service or could be removed            McGaughan
contends that it acted prudently and reasonably in relying upon information provided by the
inspector. When the inspector gave the approval to demolish the duct bank, this ultimately
resulted in additional costs to McGaughan because it had to repair the damaged electrical
lines. McGaughan should be compensated for those added costs incurred solely due to
erroneous information supplied by the inspector " (Appellant's Post-Hearing Brief at 1-2)

      The District contends that the inspector never advised the Appellant's second-tier
subcontractor "that the electrical duct bank ... had been abandoned" and that McGaughan,
through its subcontractors, specifically Miller Electric, "should have known whether the

       2
         By letter dated April 15, 1991, the Acting Director of DAS informed McGaughan of its
right to file its claim as a deemed denial with the Board, since the "Claims Officer handling this,
matter had resigned "
               .   ,                  '   i    -4-                 A S McGaughan, Co Inc , CAB No D-926

feeders in the electrical duct bank had been'deenergized." (District's Post- Hearing Brief,
at vin) In the alternative, the District contends that "even if such advice had been given by
the District's inspector, . . . [the advice] would in no way bind the District or release
McGaughan from liability . . [since] the Contract specifically precludes the District's
inspectors from directing McGaughan' s work . . . [and] the facts and circumstances here do
not justify application of the theory of implied authority. "( Id)

                                     FINDINGS OF FACT3

1.     A.S. McGaughan Company, Inc., entered into Contract No. 87-003 8-AA-2-0-LA,
dated October 5, 1 987, with the District of Columbia Department of Public Works ("DPW")
for demolition and construction of various structures and utilities at the Wastewater
Treatment Plant Central Maintenance Facility. (A.F. 1.1).

2      The Special Provisions of the Contract provide, in part

       1 . Scope of Work- Work under this Contract consists of furnishing all labor,
       services, materials, tools, plant, insurance, and equipment needed for the
       construction, proper performance, and completion of the work in the manner
       and within the time hereinafter specified m strict accordance with the
       Drawings, Specifications, and other Contract documents, per directions and
       to the satisfaction of the Engineer, and at the agreed prices.


              The following listing of the items of work included in this Contract is
       offered as a general guide only. It is not intended to determine the limitations
       of obligations under the Contract, the Contract Drawings and specifications
       being the sole determination of that. The items are


               B. Selective removal/relocation of various subsurface utilities and
               construction of two utility tunnels traversing the construction site



       2. Contract Drawings The location, general characteristics, and principal
       details of the work are indicated on drawings identified as Job No. PA-X18

       3
         In references to testimony, the names of witnesses are shown in paienthesis with Appellant's
witnesses m regular type and Government witnesses in italicize type
                                    -5-               AS McGaughan, Co Inc , CAB No D-926

titled, Central Maintenance Facility, Wastewater Treatment Plant, 5000
Overlook Avenue, S W., Washington, D.C.

       These drawings comprise the Contract Drawings or "Drawings" for the
project. Reference drawings illustrating details which may apply to this project
are on file in the Water and Sewer Utility Administration, Department of
Public Works.

The Drawings are organized as follows.

               Volume 1 - This set of Drawings, titled - Central Maintenance
       Facility, demolition and Utility Relocation - Volume 1, describes the
       work outlined in Item . . . B . . of Paragraph No 1 of these Special
       Provisions.


       20. Utility Relocations Existing utilities which are to be relocated or
       modified have been shown according to available data. Plans, profiles
       and details for the intended relocation or modification and
       specifications are included in the Contract Documents, however, the
       Contractor shall satisfy himself by performing test pits and any other
       investigations as he shall deem necessary, so as to determine the exact
       locations of existing piping prior to commencing any work.


       21 Test Pits Underground utilities are shown as far as possible in their
       actual positions, however, their exact locations are not guaranteed. The
       Contractor shall test pit each and every underground utility to
       determine its exact location. This work shall be performed well in
       advance of proposed underground work and all interferences shall
       immediately be brought to the attention of the Engineer



That General Requirements of the Contract provide, in part.

Ill Definitions - The intent and meaning of the following, whenever they
appear in the Contract Documents, shall be interpreted as follows'
                                           -6-               A S McGanghan, Co Inc , CAB No D-926

           Engineer - The Chief, or Resident Engineer, of the Construction
           Management Division of the Department of Public Works limited by
           the special duties entrusted to them.


    XL Engineer's Authority - The Engineer will be the sole judge of the intent
    and meaning of the drawings, specifications, and other Contract documents
    and his decisions thereon and his interpretations thereof shall be binding on
    all parties

                                            *t*   *T*   T*



    XII. Inspectors' - Inspectors 'are authorized to inspect all work and materials
    furnished. Such inspection may extend to all or any part of the work and to the
    preparation and manufacture of Contract materials Inspectors are authorized
    to reject material and to suspend work pending appropriate action by the
    Engineer on the question at issue. Inspectors are not authorized to revoke,
    alter, enlarge, relax, or release any Contract requirement nor to approve or
    accept any portion of the work. Inspectors will not act as foremen or perform
    other duties for the Contractor nor interfere with the Contractor's management
    of the work. Advice from inspectors in no way binds the Engineer and the
    District nor releases the Contractor from Contract requirements.

    Drawing DC-1 A4, Note 5, provides, in part.



           All services to the Laboratory Building and Chemical Building remain
           until temporary facilities or relocated facilities are available

    Drawing C-5 shows the duct bank which was encountered (Guido Tr 24-5).

    Drawing E-l, Note 5, provides*

           In each of the following pairs of feeders, one feeder shall be maintained in
           service at all times:

                                            * ,* *
           I.      SP-49 & SP-84

     The drawings are contained in A F 2
»
                                        -7-              A S McGanghan, Co Inc , CAB No D-926




7.    Drawing E-12 describes the route followed by the existing Feeder SP-49 as:

            From          To            Existing
                                        Route


            ASS#2         Chemical      G, F, EV1, EV10, EV7 & 12
            CUB.2B15      Building


             Construction Note 13 on Drawing E-12 shows the replacement Feeder SP-49
      as having the following route'



                   EV1,EV10, EV6&EV7


      Construction Note 14 provides

            Once the replacement feeder segments are installed, the following
            procedure, fully coordinated with and approved by the District shall be
            followed:

             1.    The existing feeder shall be deenergized
             2.    The replacement segment shall be spliced to the existing segment to
                    be reused.
             3.    The feeder shall be tested and returned to service.
             4.    The existing segment not reused shall be removed.

8.    McGaughan subcontracted construction of above-ground facilities to Len Parker
      (GuidoTr. 18, Itani Tr. 95).

9.    Len Parker subcontracted "everything underground," except electrical work, to
      Kirlin. (GuidoTr. 18).

10.   Kirlin subcontracted excavation work to Gebhardt. (Guido Tr 19)
                                           -8-                A S McGaughan, Co Inc , CAB No D-926

11.   McGaughan subcontacted electrical work to Miller Electric (Guido Tr 39, Itani Tr
      94).                    ;
                                                 '                i

12.   The District's contracting officer was the Director of the Department of Public
      Works, John E. Touchstone. (A.F. 1.1 )

13    The District's Engineer was the Chief of the DPW Office of Engineering Services,
      Ken Donnelly. (Ward Tr. 119)..

14.   The District's Project Manager was James C. Ward. (Ward Tr. 119).

15.   The District had 3 on-site inspectors. John Piagno was the senior resident inspector
      and supervisor, and the plumbing and piping specialist (Guido Tr 37, 40, Morales
      Tr. 179); Elvin Lewis was the electrical specialist (Guido Tr 41, Morales Tr 179);
      J. Alberto Morales was the civil and mechanical specialist. (Guido Tr. 41; Morales
      Tr. 178).

16.   McGaughan and DPW agree that the only point of contact between the contractor and
      subcontractors and District officials was through the inspectors (Guido Tr. 34) The
      contractor and subcontractors were not allowed direct access to the Engineer. Access
      was controlled by the inspectors, who the contractor and subcontactors believed acted
      as representatives of the Engineer, and the Project Manager. (Guido Tr. 36).

17.   McGaughan or its subcontractors would initially raise questions to the inspectors who
      would provide an answer or, if uncertain, would raise the issue with the Project               t
      Manager The Project Manager "would normally work it out with the inspectors "
      (Warder. 125) If McGaughan disputed the Project Manager's decision, the issue
      would be transmitted to the Engineer. (WardTr. 124)

18    The contractor "preferred] to go to [Inspector Elvin] Lewis if there was an electrical
      problem." (Guido Tr. 41).

19.   The inspectors had in their trailer office at the site "as built"' drawings of the facility
      which were not part of the contract documents. (Guido Tr. 33) Such drawings are
      apparently examples of the "[rjeference drawings illustrating details which may apply
      to this project [which] are on file in the Water and Sewer Utility Administration,
      Department of Public Works" noted in the Contract ("Reference Drawings") See
      Finding of Fact ("FF") 2, above.
                                          -9-               A S McGaughan, Co Inc , CAB No D-926

20    Mr. Lewis, the electrical specialist, was "in charge to insure that . conduit . are
      deenergized." (Morales Tr 1 84, Van Dolsen Tr. 206) He also maintained records
      regarding the status of electric circuits. (MoralesTr

21    Dal C. Van Dolsen, the Branch Chief of the Electrical Maintenance Branch of
      WASUA was responsible at Blue Plains for "deenergizing and energizing [electric]
      circuits." (Van Dolsen Tr. 202).

22    Mr Van Dolsen had blueprints from the original construction of the electrical duct
      banks which were not part of the contract documents. (Van Dolsen Tr.205) The
      blueprints were similar to other as-built drawings and were apparently examples of
      the Reference Drawings. (See FF 2 and 19, above).

23    Miller Electric, Appellant's electrical subcontractor, had dealt with Mr. Van Dolsen
      earlier in performance of the contract concerning damage to another energized
      electric line within the same duct bank involved in this appeal. (Van Dolsen Tr 206).

24.   Victor F. Guido, Jr was a general foreman in charge of mechanical work for Kirhn.
      (Guido Tr. 1 8) He was responsible for excavation of the 24-inch dilution water line
      (Guido Tr. 46)

25.   The contractor dug "test pits" in order to determine the actual location of
      underground electric lines existing on the site. (Guido Tr. 21).
                                                             i
26.   On February 16, 1988, when excavating for the 24-inch water line, subcontractor
      Gebhardt encountered a buried concrete structure which its personnel assumed to be
      an electrical duct bank. (Guido Tr. 24, 3 1).

27    Although the contract did not require the contractor to receive approval before
      demolishing an unused electric line, Kirlin personnel made it a practice to confirm
      the identity and status of an electric line with the inspectors before demolishing the
      line, regardless of how clearly the line was shown on the drawing. "[E]ven if we saw
      one on the drawing that said dead line, we still checked with [the inspectors] prior to
      tearing it out." (Guido Tr. 24).

28.   Mr Guido sought the assistance of John Piagano, the District's senior inspector, in
      identifying the structure. However, Mr. Piagano was not in the on-site trailer at the
      time Mr. Lewis, the District's electrical specialist, was similarly not in the trailer at
      the time. Mr. Morales, the District's civil and mechanical specialist, was the only
                                           -10-          '    AS McGaughan, Co fnc , CAB No D-926

      District representative in the on-site trailer at the time Mr. Guido sought assistance.
      (Guido Tr. 32)

29    When a problem arose in performance of the job where the relevant inspector was not
      available, the other inspectors would "help out with the situation." (Guido Tr 37,
      Morales 1r

30.   Mr. Guido and Mr. Morales together reviewed the contract and earlier "as-built"
      drawings (Guido Tr. 22 and 31); located the interfering duct on each set of drawings
      (Guido Tr. 57); and "came to the conclusion that there was a duct bank which was
      abandoned " (Guido Tr 59>)

31    Mr. Guido did not consult McGaughan's electrical subcontractor, Miller Electric,
      (Guido Tr. 54), even though another electric line, SP-71, contained in the same duct
      bank had been damaged earlier in performance of the contract and repaired by Miller
      Electric. (Van Dolsen Tr. 206).
                                 '      i
32    Neither Mr. Guido nor Mr. Morales consulted the District's electrical inspector Mr.
      Lewis, or his records (Morales Tr. 181); nor did they consult Mr. Van Dolsen, the
      District employee responsible for deenergizing electric circuits, or review the detailed
      electrical Reference Drawings which were maintained in his office ( Van Dolsen Tr
      207).

33.    Acting on the erroneous information that the duct bank which had been encountered
       was abandoned, Gebhardt personnel began demolition. Almost immediately, the
       equipment struck a live electric wire causing an explosion and extensive damage to
       the circuits in the duct bank. (Johnson Tr. 68).



        A contractor is entitled to an equitable adjustment of the contract price if a condition
affecting performance is materially different from the conditions depicted by the District in
the contract documents, or otherwise officially communicated to the contractor. This appeal
raises the issue of whether, under the specific circumstances of this matter, a factually
incorrect statement of a District inspector as to the location and status of an electric line
constitutes a contractually binding statement of the site condition, upon which the contractor
may rely, and for which the contractor is entitled to an equitable adjustment. The Board finds
that the Appellant could not, under the circumstances of this matter, rely on the factual
statement of the civil/mechanical inspector who gave erroneous information as to the status
of an electrical line. Accordingly, the appeal is denied, with prejudice
                                           -11 -             AS McGaughan, Co Inc , CAB No D-926

       The Appellant contends that its subcontractor requested "the inspector to fill in a gap
in information" and that "McGaughan and its subcontractors were entitled to rely upon the
information provided by the inspector since this is the type of information which had
routinely been provided by the inspector pursuant to his normal duties." Appellant asserts
that past practice on the project established a procedure whereby McGaughan and its
subcontractors inquired of the inspectors as to the condition and location of utilities it
unearthed. McGaughan and Kirlin assert that they reasonably and properly relied upon the
information supplied by the inspector. Appellant's Posthearmg Brief at 8.

        The District contends that "[ujnder the terms of the Contract, no         advice [by an
inspector] can bind the District " District Posthearmg Brief, p 18 The Contract General
Requirements provide that "[t]he Engineer will be the sole judge of the intent and meaning
of the drawings, specifications, and other Contract documents and his decisions thereon and
his interpretations thereon shall be binding on all parties." General Requirements U XI The
General Requirements further provide that ". . . [inspectors will not act as foremen or
perform other duties for the Contractor . . . . Advice from inspectors in no way binds the
Engineer and the District nor releases the Contractor from Contract requirements." K XII
(FF 3). On this basis, the District contends that it is not liable for any statement made by an
inspector, and thus is not responsible for the cost of repairing the damage caused by the
erroneous information.

Implied Authority of a Subordinate Employee

        It is clear from the Contract General Requirements that inspectors did not have actual
authority to bind the District. The inspectors also lacked apparent authority, since the
doctrine of apparent authority is inoperative to bind the Government to acts of its agents who
exceed their authority. Jascourt v United States, 521 F.2d 1406, 207 Ct Cl. 955 (1975)
Although a literal reading of Section XII of the General Requirements, the clause defining
the authority of inspectors, declares that a statement by an inspector could never bind the
District, this Board has, consistent with federal Boards of Contract Appeals and the Federal
Circuit "upheld the premise that broad warnings and general exculpatory language do not
shift the liability resulting from positive representations made by the government and relied
upon by the contractor." James A Federlme, Inc , CAB No. D-834 (Dec. 15, 1993), 41
D C Reg. 3853, 3863; see Morrison-Knudsen Company, Inc v United Slates, 397 F.2d
826, 841-2,184 Ct.Cl. 661,686-7 (1968). However, "such limitations are not meaningless"
and, to be disregarded, require a showing that the Government, at least by implication, gave
the representative authority to act. Inet Power, NASABCA No. 566-23, 68-1 BCA 1)7020
at 32441 "Such authority may be implied when considered an integral part of specific
duties assigned to a government employee " Dot Systems, Inc , DOTCAB No. 208, 82-2
BCA 1)15,817 at 95,786. Authority may also be implied when the inspector is the key
                                           -12-      •       AS McGaughan, Co Inc , CAB No D-926

Government person with regard to the performance of the contract         Urban Pathfinders ,
Inc , ASBCA No. 23134, 79-1 BCA 1(13,709 at 67,260.

        In the instant case, DPW, by its actions, vested authority in subordinate employees
to exercise the authority specifically granted, in the Contract to the Engineer The parties
agree that the inspectors and Project Manager controlled access to the Engineer.
McGaughan's subcontractor testified that its only contact with District officials was through
the inspectors, who acted as representatives of the Engineer. (FF 16). The District's
personnel testified that the Engineer was inaccessible to contractors Mr. Ward, trie
District's Project Manager, in response to a question from the Board as to which matters
"would go to [the.Engineer] or would [be worked out]... with the inspectors," testified that
he "would normally work it out with the inspectors. Only if it became an issue with the
contractor where we didn't agree on a issue, maybe it would go up to Mr. Donnelly for a
decision. If there was no dispute, normally it wouldn't " (FF 17). Clearly, the District
cannot limit the contractor's access to the Engineer and then deny the authority of
government personnel assigned to take action necessary for the contractor to perform. To
do so would make it impossible to perform the contract. The authority of representatives
assigned to act on behalf of the District must be implied to be sufficiently broad to permit
expeditious action by the employee in performing the employee's delegated responsibilities
 Urban Pathfinders , Inc , 79-1 BCA at 67,260
                                      i             ,       '          i
        The Board therefore concludes that, notwithstanding the contractual provisipn that
the sole authority to interpret the contract drawings and specifications is vested in the
Engineer, and the contractual disclaimer of any authority of the inspectors to bind the
District, the District's restrictions on the contractor's access to the Engineer necessarily
implies the authority of others to act in the Engineer's stead The practice of the District of
 assigning other officials to render interpretations necessary to perform the requirements-of
the Contract vests the Engineer's authority in those subordinate employees to the extent of
their assignments.

       The authority implied to a subordinate employee can be no greater than the authority
actually vested in the superior employee Futher, the authority must be essential to the
performance of the contract and may not be utilized solely for the convenience or benefit of
the contractor .without value to the District. Further, the authority exercised by the
subordinate employee must be within the clear scope of the subordinate employee's
assignment.

       No government official has the authority to gratuitously relieve a contractor of a
contractual responsibility. WRB Corporation, 183 Ct.Cl. 409, 461 (1968). Appellant's
clami is grounded on a statement by a District inspector that there were no live electric
                                                 -13-                AS McGanghan, Co Inc , CAB No D-926


circuits within a duct bank encountered in excavating for a new water line. Determination
of the location of energized electric lines was the contractual responsibility of the Appellant
under paragraphs 20 and 21 of the Special Provisions - (FF 2)

        Indeed, the contractor testified that it did "Jest pit" the area. (FF 25). The incident
giving rise to the claim occurred during underground excavation work. The duct bank was
shown on Drawing C-5 (FF 5), and should have been located and its contents identified
through the required test pit process prior to beginning any underground work, in
accordancei with the general requirement of paragraph 21, to locate each and every
underground utility. (FF 2). In addition, the feeder which was encountered, SP-49, was
specifically identified in Drawing E-12 as an electric utility to be relocated, bringing it
within the separate requirement of Paragraph 20 that the contractor shall "satisfy himself
as to the exact location of the line "prior to commencing any work " (FF 2)

        The contractor was further on notice that Feeder SP-49 was likely to be energized.
Drawing E-12 clearly stated that Feeder SP-49 runs to the Chemical Building (FF 7)
General Note 5 on drawing DC-1A provides that "all services to the Laboratory Building
and Chemical Building remain until temporary facilities or relocated facilities are available."
(FF 4). General Note 5 of drawing E-l further requires that "in each of the following pairs
of feeders, one feeder shall be maintained in service at all times. . . SP49 & SP84." (FF
6). At a minimum, all lines specifically required to be maintained in service should have
been identified by the contractor prior to beginning excavation. The contractor claimed to
be unaware of the identity of the electric line it encountered, which was one of the lines
identified in the contract drawings as feeding the Chemical Building, and specifically
indicated as one of a pair of lines required to be maintained in service. This indicates that
either the contractor's test pit procedure was inadequate, or, if the encountered line had been
identified in the test pit process, that the information was not communicated to the
excavation subcontractor.

        The contractor's obligation to accurately locate, identity and determine the active
status of the underground utilities by specific procedures, and the consequent liability for
failure to do so, cannot be transferred to the Government by requesting assistance from a
Government representative.5 As opposed to the required procedure for energizing or

        5
           The specific requirements to "test pit each and every underground utility" and the duplicativ.e
requirement to locate every utility required to be relocated distinguishes this case fioin the Federhne
case In Federhne, this Board held that a general requirement that the contractor verify the "location of
utilities well in advance of conducting construction operations" would not absolve the District from
liability resulting from a material discrepancy in the depth of a ductbank specifically stated on the
contract drawings That case concluded that a contractor in preparing a bid could not reasonably be
expected to include a contingency for errors in the contract documents , In the instant matter, however,
                                                -14-                A S McGaughan, Co Inc , CAB No D-926

deenergizing lines which requires a joint effort by the contractor and the District,
identification of the utilities is within the sole responsibility of the contractor. (FF 7) The
fact that a government official gave, or attempted to give, the information or assurance
requested by the contractor does not change the responsibility for its accuracy or justify
reliance upon the information. If the contract places sole responsibility on the contractor to
obtain the requested information, then the government has no obligation to the Appellant
in this respect. Even a specifically authorized official giving such information "is rendering
a gratuitous courtesy to the [Appellant], rather than discharging a contractual obligation that
rested upon the [government]. The [government] is mot chargeable . ; in connection with
an act which is not required by the contract, which is done for the benefit of the contractor,
and which is taken advantage of by the contractor." WRB Corporation, 183 Ct.Cl. 409,461
(1968).

        If the law were to the contrary, a contractor could avoid responsibility for its own
work by attempting to verity every determination it makes with a District representative. In
fact, the subcontractor testified that it regularly did just that, seeking approval of the District
prior to undertaking any demolition, even if the documents were clear that demolition was
required. (FF 27).

Availability of Information

       Even if identification of the underground'Utilities were not the responsibility of the
contractor, reliance upon additional information provided by a Government representative
is only appropriate if the information is not in the possession of the contractor and is not
otherwise available to the contractor. Townsco Contracting Co , ASBCA No 13742, 71-2
BCA ^|8962. The duct bank in question is shown on,several of the drawings (FF 5-6), and
both its existing route and relocated route are specifically described by landmarks on
Drawing E-12. (FF 7). Upon encountering the duct bank, the subcontractor sought an
interpretation of the drawings by an inspector. (FF 28). Although the record indicates that
the inspectors had a set of reference drawings showing details not contained in the contract
drawings, there is no indication that the earlier drawings were not available to the contractor.
(FF 19). Indeed, such drawings are noted in the contract itself. (FF 2) At the hearing in
this matter, the, line which was damaged was clearly identified on the contract drawings
without referring to the Reference Drawings. (FF 5) There was no evidence that the
Reference Drawings were necessary to identify the damaged line or had any relevance to the


bidders were required to include in their bid prices provision for a test pit process to locate each and
every utility, as well as each utility being relocated or modified Further, in Federaline, the error was
contained in bid documents upon which the contractor could be expected to rely in pieparmg its bid,
while in the instant matter, the alleged erroneous information was not given until well into performance
          ,                                 -15-              A S McGaughan, Co Inc, CAB No D-926

question of whether a line was currently energized. The contractor had no special concern
as to the identity of the line which was damaged. It was the regular practice of the contractor
to seek assurance from an inspector even if the specifications were clear. The information
on the drawings was all that the contractor needed in order to properly identify the duct bank
in question and to determine for itself whether it could be safely removed. By its
gratuitously seeking the assurance of an inspector, the contractor cannot transfer the risk of
an error in interpretation from itself to the government.

        Beyond consulting the contract documents, the excavation subcontractor could have
resolved its question by consulting Appellant's electrical subcontractor. Note 13 of Drawing
E-12 provides that the contractor will "install replacement feeder segment" for a portion of
the existing SP-49 feeder, the line which was damaged, and specifically designates the
segments of SP-49 to be replaced. Note 14 requires a detailed procedure for deenergizing
the existing feed and splicing in the replacement line. Such work clearly required the
contractor to locate the feeder line to be partially relocated. McGaughan had subcontracted
all of the electrical work to Miller Electric. (FF 11). Miller Electric had been working on
the project for at least several months when the incident occurred, and had previously
repaired another electric line, SP-71, contained in the same duct bank, which had been
damaged earlier in contract performance (FF 23). Although there is no evidence in the
record as to the exact knowledge Miller Electric possessed, it can be presumed that Miller
was aware of the location and status of the electric lines which it was to relocate, particularly
when it had recently worked on a circuit within the same duct bank. McGaughan and its
excavation subcontractor are chargeable with knowledge possessed by the electrical
subcontractor, Miller Electric See Edward L KolbarCo , ASBCA No. 15520, 73-2 BCA
T| 10063. Nevertheless, neither McGaughan nor the excavation subcontractor attempted to
 consult Miller Electric. This failure precludes reasonable reliance on information supplied
 by the Government inspector.

Scope of Inspector's Assignment
                      a


       To justify reliance on advice of a government representative, the facts and
circumstances of performance must imply the authority of the individual subordinate
employee to speak on behalf of the government Merely seeking the opinion of any
government representative is not sufficient, even if the government representative responds
to the request and provides information. In this matter, Appellant contends that it could
properly rely on information provided by any one of the three inspectors. We conclude that
it was unreasonable for the excavation contractor to rely on information from the inspector
specializing in civil and mechanical trades with regard to an electrical question. Appellant's
witnesses agreed that the division of authority among the three inspectors was clearly
understood. One inspector was^the supervisor and plumbing and piping specialist, one was
                                           -16-              AS McGaughan, Co Inc , CAB No D-926

Mr Piagno, the senior inspector, nor Mr. Lewis, the electrical inspector, was present when
the incident occurred. (FF 28). Appellant sought the assistance of Mr. Morales, the civil at)d
mechaniqal specialist, who was the only inspector on site at the time. (FF 28). Appellant's
witness candidly testified that Mr Morales was not his first choice in seeking clarification
of an electrical question. (FF18 and 28). Appellant also did notseek direction from Mr Van
Delsen (FF 33), the Branch Chief of the Electrical Maintenance Branch who had the
responsibility to energize and deenergize the electric utility lines.

                  .   /               CONCLUSION

         We have carefully considered and rejected the Appellant's arguments that it was
justified in relying on information received from Inspector Morales that the electric line it
encountered was not activated, and that the District was responsible for the resulting damage
when the inspector's statement proved to be in error We conclude that the Appellant was
 itself contractually responsible for determining the identity and status of electric lines and
that no District official could gratuitously assume this obligation; that the correct
 information was available in the contract documents and was most likely known to
 Appellant's electrical subcontractor, and that the official from whom the Appellant received
 the erroneous information did not have the authority to transmit that information on behalf
 of the District. Accordingly, Appellant's appeal is denied.



DATED: November 18. 1999
                                                          Matthew S. Watson
                                                          Administrative Judge

CONCURRING:



          E. SIMKINS
                              J
Chief Administrative Judge



J N A T H A N D. ZESCHKAU
Administrative Judge
