                  •                           •
              GOVERNMENT OF THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA
                      CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD

APPEAL OF:

     URBAN SERVICE SYSTEMS CORPORATION
                                                CAB No. D-901
     Under Contract No.   0120-RD-PW

              OPINION AND ORDER ON MOTION TO DISMISS

      The Board has pending before it the motion of the District of
Columbia to dismiss the above-captioned appeal on the ground that
the Board lacks jurisdiction in this matter because the appeal
filed   by Urban     Services  Systems   Corporation   ("Urban"  or
"Appellant") was untimely filed.    The District contends that the
instant appeal was not filed with the Board in accordance with the
requirements of section 904 of the District of Columbia Procurement
Practices Act of 1985 ("PPA"), D.C. Code § 1-1189.4, and Board Rule
200.2(a), 36 DCR 2700 (1989). For the reasons set forth below, the
District's motion is DENIED.
      In its appeal, Urban contends that the District of Columbia
has breached Contract No. 0120-RD-PW by the Contracting Officer's
refusal to stop a practice of taking away work that was being
performed by Urban in accordance with the terms of the contract and
giving this work to another company. Specifically, Urban alleges
that the size of containers to be utilized by Urban in its trash
collection duties resulted in work being transferred to another
collection firm.    As evidence, Appellant supplied a series of
correspondence from its President and various legal counsels to the
Department of Administrative Services and the Office of the
Corporation Counsel.

     On December 7, 1990, the contracting officer issued an
explanatory letter to Urban recounting the District's actions.-
The Appellant interpreted this letter to be the contracting
officer's final decision and filed a claim with the Director of the
Department of Administrative Services ("DAS") on January 24, 1991.
According to the Appellant, no decision was rendered by the
Directo~.  Thus, in accordance with D.C. Code § 1-1185.5(c), the
Appellant could have deemed the claim denied by the Director by the
end of April 1991 and filed an appeal of this denial with' the
Board. The instant appeal was filed with the Board on December 31,
1991 when, some eight months later, no decision had been issued by
the Director of DAS.

     The issue of the timeliness of an appeal to the Board when
there has been no decision issued by the Director of DAS was


    !lIn the Board's opinion, this letter does not meet the
requirements of a contracting officer's final decision as
established in the procurement regulations. 27 DCMR § 3803.5
(1988) .
                               - 2 -
                                              •
extensively discussed by this Board in A.S. McGaughan Co., Inc.,
CAB No. D-926, 40 DCR 4855 (December 10, 1992). In McGaugh an , the
Board correctly interpreted the intent and purpose of the PPA and
its attendant regulations not to deny or to limit a contractor from
filing an appeal with the Board in cases where the Director of DAS
has not rendered a decision.         In this instance, the statute
permi ts , but does not require', a contractor to commence an appeal
if a decision is not issued by DAS within ninety (90) days.       In
essence, a contractor can want ad infinitum for a written DAS
decision; there is no time limit for an appeal to the Board, if
there is no written DAS decision.
     Therefore, the District's motion to dismiss is DENIED; and it
is hereby

     ORDERED, in accordance with Rule 204, that the District file
its Appeal File, within 30 days of receipt of this Order: and it is

     FURTHER ORDERED, in accordance with Rule 203.3, that the
Appellant shall file its complaint with the Board, within 30 days
of receipt of this Order: and it is

      FURTHER ORDERED, in accordance with Rule 203.3, that        the
Appellant supplement the District's appeal file, if necessary;    and
it is

     FURTHER ORDERED,  that in accordance wi th Rul~       205,   the
District file its answer to the Appellant's complaint. J


DATE:   October 6, 1993
                               CY THIA G. HAWKINS-LEON
                               Administrative Judge


Copies to:      Stuart C. Law, Esquire
                Law & Murphey
                1619 New Hampshire Avenue, N.W.
                Washington, DC 20009

                Nancy K. Hapeman and Edward J. Rich
                Assistants Corporation Counsel
                Office of the Corporation Counsel
                441 4th Street, N.W., suite 1060
                Washington, DC 20001


    ~/It is noted by the Board that, when this appeal was filed in
December 1991, the Appellant elected an accelerated proceeding
pursuant to Rule 216.    In light of the period of time that has
lapsed since Appellant's original filing, the Board respectfully
requests that the Appellant notify the Board whether it still
elects to follow this procedure.
