                   GOVERNMENT OF THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA
                         CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD



APPEAL OF:

        CENTEX-SIMPSON CONSTRUCTION                                     )
                                                                        )       CAB No. D-931
        Under Contract No. JB/890070                                    )


      For the Appellant: Brian Cohen, Esquire. For the Government: Duane A. Brown,
Contracts Manager.

      Opinion by Administrative Judge Terry Hart Lee, with Administrative Judge Zoe
Bush concurringY


                    OPINION AND ORDER ON MOTION TO DISMISS

        On March 1, 1993, District of Columbia General Hospital~1 filed a motion to
dismiss the instant appeal on the following grounds: (1) the Board lacks jurisdiction under
its rules, the contract and DCGH regulations to grant relief from an appeal on a "deemed
denied" basis; (2) the Board lacks jurisdiction because appellant has failed to exhaust its
administrative remedies; and (3) the Board lacks jurisdiction because appellant expressly
waived its right to a contracting officer's final decision.

       In support of its position on the first ground, the Hospital asserts that because it is
not bound, as an independent agency, by the Procurement Practices Act of 1985 (PPA),l'
the appellant has no right to appeal to the Board from a "deemed denial" of its claim.
DCGH contends further that neither the contract, DCGH regulations nor the Board's rules
provide for an appeal of a "deemed denied" claim. Therefore, argues the Hospital, the
appeal should be dismissed; for no procedure exists to allow an appeal from a "deemed
denied" claim.

        In support of its position on the second ground, appellee contends that pursuant to
the contract, appellant has the right to appeal only from a contracting officer's final
decision; and because no final decision has been issued on appellant's claim, appellant has
failed to exhaust its administrative remedies, thus depriving the Board of jurisdiction.



     IIAdministrative Judge Benjamin B. Terner did not take part in this decision because of an extended
illness.

  d/Hereinafter referred to as "appellee", "DCGH" or "Hospital".

  ,!/D.C. Code § § 1-1181.1, et ~. (1987).
                                            -2-          CAB No. D-931, Centex-Simpson Construction


        In support of its posItIOn on the third ground, DCGH contends that appellant
waived its right to a contracting officer's final decision by submitting "ambiguous and
conditional" requests and then withdrawing these requests. The Hospital cites a letter
dated February 7, 1992, from appellant, wherein it allegedly requested a final decision and
simultaneously suggested negotiation of the claim in lieu of a final decision. DCGH
contends that appellant's participation in negotiations after March 12, 1992, was viewed by
the Hospital as a "de facto" retraction of the request for a contracting officer's final
decision. Additionally, DCGH argues that by virtue of certain language in a June 26, 1992,
letter from appellant, it (the Hospital) "perceived" another waiver of a request for a
contracting officer's final decision.

       On March 12, 1993, appellant filed its memorandum of points and authorities in
opposition to the Hospital's motion to dismiss. Therein, appellant asserts that DCGH's
motion is the latest attempt to delay resolution of the appeal and that the facts set out in
the motion are at best fragmentary and thoroughly misleading. Appellant further contends
that even if DCGH is not bound by the PPA, it does not follow that it may take as long as
it wants to issue a contracting officer's final decision with no consequences. Otherwise,
argues appellant, the appellee's position would lead to the absurd result that if the
Hospital failed to issue a contracting officer's final decision, for whatever reason, a
contractor would have no remedy. Appellant further claims that the Hospital's position is
not an accurate reflection of the law and is wholly devoid of merit.


FACTS

       1.     On May 18, 1989, appellant entered into a contract with the Hospital to
construct an ambulatory and critical care center. (Appeal File, Exhibit 1).

       2.      By letter dated June 27, 1989, appellant advised Gilbane Building Company
("Gilbane"), apparently the construction manager, that its subcontractor, Metrex
Excavating, Inc. ("Metrextl ) had encountered "... additional concrete walls to demolish and
additional. rubble not shownon the contract drawings ...." (Points and Authorities in
Support of Opposition by·· Appellant to Appellee's Motion to Dismiss, Exhibit 1).iI
Appellant requested a-meeting as soon as possible to determine how to document the
additional work and how compensation would be made.

      3.      By. letter dated June 28, 1989, Gilbane advised appellant that it (appellant)
should have reasonably expected the conditions encountered and that as a result, no
change to. the contract cost or time was warranted. (Opp.,Ex. 2).

      ..   . By letter dated July 5, 1989, appellant informed Gilbane that neither it nor
MetrexagreedwithGilbane's position regarding cost and time and that a Metrex reply
would be submitted OIl that date. (Opp., Ex. 3).
                                             -3-         CAB No. D-931, Centex-Simpson Construction


        5.   By letter dated July 18, 1989, appellant submitted to Gilbane a July 3, 1989,
letter from Metrex and gave notice to the contracting officer under Article 3 of the
GENERAL PROVISIONS on the contract. (Opp., Ex. 4) .
                                     .,



        6.     About seven months later, on February 7, 1990, GiIbane advised appellant
that it needed additional information from Metrex regarding its claim for additional costs
for wall and rubble removal. Gilbane advised that it would again review the request when
all of the data was received. (Opp., Ex. 5). Gilbane also advised that it had forwarded
appellant's request to the owner and architect.

        7.    By letter dated July 26, 1990, appellant submitted copies of Metrex' June 22,
1990, response (and documentation) to Gilbane's February 7, 1990, request. (Opp., Ex. 6).
In the second paragraph, appellant stated, in pertinent part: "We request negotiation and
settlement or issuance of a final decision as requested by Metrex Excavating, Inc. attached
letter. ... " (emphasis added). This was appellant's first request for a final decision;
however, it was made to Gilbane, not the contracting officer.

       8.     Six months later, by letter dated January 31, 1991, appellant wrote to DCGH
and referenced its proposal of July 26, 1990, regarding Metrex' differing site conditions
claim for additional rubble removal. This letter was submitted pursuant to Article 7 of the
contract. (Opp., Ex. 7). The amount of Metrex' claim through January 31, 1991, was
$664,281.00, plus interest.

        9.      By letter dated February 20, 1991, appellant again submitted Metrex' claim
to the Hospital, pursuant to Article 7 of the contract. Therein, appellant stated: "We
request that you issue a Contracting Officer's final decision as required by Article 7."
(Opp., Ex. 8). This was the appellant's first direct request to DCGH for a contracting
officer's final decision. In this submission, Metrex' revised the amount of its claim to
$599,758.00, plus interest.

        10.    By letter dated March 29, 1991, to DCGH, appellant, apparently in response
to the Hospital's March 26, 1991, letter to counsel, again requested a contracting officer's
final decision. (Opp., Ex. 9).

       11.    Apparently, in April 1991, the contracting officer asked appellant to re-
submit its claim; and appellant did so by letter dated May 3, 1991. (Opp., Ex. 10).
Therein, appellant made its third request for a contracting officer's final decision.

        12.   The Hospital's April 1991 letter raised an issue with respect to appellant's
support of its subcontractor's claim. (Opp. Ex. 11). This necessitated a response from
appellant's counsel, explaining its legal position. (Id.). Therein, inter alia, counsel
reiterated appellant's request for a final decision, ·thus making it the fourth request since
February 1991.

       13.    By letter dated June 21, 1991, the DCGH contracting officer sought
additional information from appellant in order to clarify "certain discrepancies" contained
                                                    _4 -          CAB No. D-931, Ccntex-Simpson Construction


in the May 3, 1991, submission. (Opp., Ex. 12). Therein, the contracting officer stated:
"We will attempt to render a Final Decision as expeditiously as possible after receiving
your reply." The contracting officer also requested that appellant's response be attested to
before a notary public. However, nowhere in the contract documents or the DCGH
procurement regulations is there any requirement for a verified claim.

       14.    Approximately six months later, by letter dated December 20, 1991, appellant
submitted its and Metrex' revised proposal for additional rubble removal. (Opp., Ex. 13).
The third paragraph of the letter states:

        As per Article 7 of the contract document, we request the Contracting
        Officers [sic] final decision within 30 days, or schedule a negotiation meeting
        in an effort to resolve this matter within the same time frame. (emphasis
        added).

This letter constituted appellant's fifth request for a final decision.              It also revised the
amount of Metrex' claim to $486,808.00, plus interest.

        15.   By letter dated January 9, 1992, the acting contracting officer2l for DCGH
asked appellant to re-submit its December 21, 1991, response because the reply was not
verified. (Opp., Ex. 14). In pertinent part, the letter states: "Once your reply is properly
submitted, the Hospital will consider your request for a Contracting Officer's Final
Decision.... "

       16.    By letter dated February 7, 1992, appellant re-submitted its               response to the
appellee's June 21, 1991, letter. (Motion to Dismiss, Exhibit 1).21                       This time the
submission was verified. It also reiterated appellant's request for a final              decision or the
scheduling of a negotiation session. This was appellant's sixth request for              a final decision.

       17.    By letter dated March 12, 1992, the acting contracting officer acknowledged
appellant's February 7, 1992, submission and its request for a final decision. (Opp., Ex. 15;
MD, Ex. II). However, the acting contracting officer stated:

        After an extensive review of your answers by the Hospital, there appears to
        be a number of issues which remain unsettled. Consequently..., I am
        inclined to forego the issuance of a Contracting Officer's Final Decision at
        this time. In lieu of the written decision, I propose that Centex and the
        Hospital enter into negotiations in an effort to conciliate this matter and
        clarify the outstanding issues. (emphasis added).


   1'Sometime between June 1991 and January 1992, there was a Change in contracting officers. David L.
Moore appears to have been the original contracting officer. In January 1992, Duane A Brown was
designated "acting" contracting officer; and by April 1992, Brown became the contracting officer. (See Opp.,
Ex. 17).

   Q/Hereinafter referred to a "MD, Ex(s). _".
                                               -5-          CAB No. D-931, Ccntex-Simpson Construction


       18.     A meeting between the parties was scheduled for April 1, 1992; however, it
was cance]]ed on March 30, 1992, by DCGH. (Opp., Ex. 16). Apparently, no subsequent
meeting was scheduled. As a result, and because of the inordinate delay in resolving the
claim, appe]]ant made its seventh demand for a contracting officer's final decision on April
7, 1992. (Id.). Appe]]ant stated:

       ... [I]f you do not issue a Contracting Officer's Final Decision or schedule a
       negotiation meeting by close of business Friday, April 10, 1992, we wi11 treat
       you action as a constructive denial of this claim, from which an immediate
       appeal wi]] be taken.

       19.    On March 20, 1992, appe]]ant filed a claim for delay costs associated with the
construction project. (Opp., Ex. 17).

        20.     By letter dated April 9, 1992, the contracting officer responded to appe]]ant's
April 7, 1992, letter. (Opp., Ex. 17). While acknowledging the inordinate delay in
resolving Metrex' claim, the contracting officer blamed the delay on appel1ant. He also
advised appe]]ant that in view of its March 20, 1992, delay claim and information
concerning potential additional c1aims associated with the project, he was not going to issue
a final decision on Metrex' discrete c1aim. The contracting officer stated that he intended
to treat a]] of appe11ant's c1aims as one. He said further:

       Your claims have not been denied and you have no basis from which to file
       an appeal without first exhausting the appropriate administrative process
       described in your contract with the Hospital.

       21.    Neither the delay c1aim nor the potential claims on the project were in any
way related to Metrex' c1aim for an equitable adjustment for differing site conditions. ZI

       22.    By letter dated June 23, 1992, appel1ant made its eighth request for a
contracting officer's final decision. It asked for a response by July 7, 1992, or it would
consider the c1aim to be denied and take the necessary steps to file an appeal with the
Board. (Opp., Ex. 18).

       23.    By letter dated June 25, 1992, the contracting officer responded to
appe11ant's June 23 letter. (Opp., Ex. 19). Therein, and significantly, he stated that
Metrex had requested that he forego issuance of a final decision, in lieu of attempting to
negotiate settlement. He also said. that he remained committed to settling the matter.
Further, he said that appellant would receive a reply to its "most recent submission" by July
20, 1992. In c1osing, the contracting officer said;

       ... Moreover, the Hospital will reject any attempt by Centex to appeal to
       the CAB on a 'deemed denial basis' since it is the Hospital's intent, short of


  ZlSee CAB No. 0-931, Opinion and Order on Motion to Consolidate, dated December 22, 1992.
                                             _6 -         CAB No. D-931, Centex-Simpson Construction


       settlement, to render a Contracting Officer's Final Decision in this matter. It
       is the Contracting Officer's Final Decision that will provide you a basis for
       appeal to the CAB.

        24.    By letter dated June 26, 1992, appellant responded to DCGH's June 25
letter. (Opp., Ex. 20; MD, Ex. III). Therein, appellant stated that it was "encouraged" that
the Hospital remained committed to settling Metrex' claim. It then reiterated its concerns
regarding the appellee's handling of the claim: (1) that neither Gilbane nor Baker-Cooper
had reviewed its proposal adequately to enter into any meaningful discussions; and (2)
there appeared to be an effort to deny the claim based on selected language in Metrex'
contract taken out of context. Appellant ended the letter by saying:

       In order to enter into meaningful negotiations, we need to clearly understand
       your concerns or objections to our proposal. If we move forward to settle
       this matter, we do not need a Contracting Officer's Final Decision; we just
       need a clear response to our latest submission.

       25.    On July 30, 1992, the appellant filed a notice of appeal with the Board, as a
result of the ". . . failure of the contracting officer. .. to issue a contracting officer's
decision on the claim Centex submitted in February 1991, as amended pursuant to the
request of D.C. General Hospital in January 1992." (Opp., Ex. 21; MD, Ex. IV).

       26.   Again, after submission of additional information at the contracting officer's
request and that official's continued failure to issue a final decision, appellant submitted a
second notice of appeal dated November 6, 1992. (Opp., Ex. 22).


OPINION

D.C. Code § 1-1181.4(a) states:

       Nothing in this chapter shall abrogate the authority of a separate branch of
       government or an independent agency, as defined in subchapter I of Chapter
       15 of this title, to enter into contracts or to issue rules and regulations for
       the awarding of contract pursuant to existing law. (emphasis added).

D.C. Code   §   1-1181.4(e) states:

       Any branch or agency of government exempted from the provisions of this
       chapter by subsection (a) of this section may formally agree to be bound by
       any provisions of this chapter, or by the final rules and procedures adopted
       pursuant to this chapter. (emphasis added).

        In 1977, the D.C. General Hospital Commission was established as an independent
agency of the District of Columbia. D.C. Code § 32-211 (1987). Its authority includes, but
is not limited to entering into contracts,
                                             -7-          CAB No. D-931, Ccntex-Simpson Construction


        ... including contracts for capital construction projects for which funds have
        been authorized and made available ....

D.C. Code § 32-220(8). However, the Hospital Commission's authority to enter into
contracts shall be exercised:

        . . . only pursuant to procurement rules which the Commission shall
        promulgate that conform to all District of Columbia and federal laws
        regarding procurements by the District of Columbia government. . . .
        (emphasis added).

rd. The applicable procurement regulations of DCGH became effective in 1978, seven
years prior to the enactment of the PPA. The regulations' only reference to contract
disputes is found at section 1-1.318-1, which states:

       (a)     When a final decision of the contracting officer concerns a dispute
       that is or may be subject to the Disputes Clause, a paragraph substantially as
       follows (shall] be included in the decision:

               (1)   This decision is made in accordance with the Disputes
                     Clause and shall be final and conclusive as provided
                     therein, unless, within 30 days from the date of receipt
                     of this decision, a written notice of appeal addressed to
                     the Contract Appeals Board is mailed or otherwise
                     furnished to the Contracting Officer. The notice of
                     appeal, which is to be signed by you as the contractor
                     or by an attorney acting on your behalf, and which may
                     be in letter form, should indicate that an appeal is
                     intended, should refer to this decision and should
                     identify the contract by number. The notice of appeal
                     may include a statement of the reasons why the
                     decision is considered to be erroneous.

              (2)    A copy of each contracting officer's decision shall be
                     furnished to the contractor by certified mail, return
                     receipt requested, or by any other method which
                     provides evidence of the date of receipt of the decision
                     by the contractor.

        The District of Columbia Procurement Regulations are contained in Title 27 of the
District of Columbia Municipal Regulations (DCMR) (July 1988). Chapter 38 governs
protests, claims and disputes. Section 3801.2 of 27 DCMR requires that each District
contract contain a disputes clause, ". . . that provides for resolution of disputes in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter." Section 3803 of 27 DCMR establishes the
mechanism for handling claims against the District. Section 3803.5 states, in pertinent part:
                                                     -8-           CAB No. D·931, Ccntex·Simpson Construction


         If the claim is not resolved by mutual agreement, the contracting officer shall
         issue a written decision on the claim within sixty (60) calendar days after the
         receipt of the claim .. " (emphasis added).

The Disputes Clause contained in the contract in question provides:

         A.      If a dispute arises relating to the contract, the contractor may
                 submit a claim to the Contracting Officer who shall Issue a
                 written decision on the dispute. (emphasis added)}Y

       As can be seen from the statutory and regulatory provisions set out above, neither
the DCGH procurement regulations nor the Disputes Clause set forth in the contract
complies with the Hospital's statutory requirement to promulgate procurement regulations
"... that conform to all District of Columbia and federal laws regarding procurements by
the District of Columbia government." (emphasis added). D.C. Code § 32-220, supra.
Consequently, we must apply the provisions of the PP A and its implementing regulations to
the dispute before us. 2I


   WThe Disputes Clause of the contract is found at Article 7 of the Standard Contract Provisions for Use
with Specifications for District of Columbia General Hospital Construction Projects (1973), incorporated by
reference into the sUbject contract. However, Article 7 was deleted in its entirety by Transmittal No. 9
(undated) to the contract and was replaced with the language set forth herein.

   P.lWe note here that in May 1989, the Board was advised by the Hospital that the procurement regulations
were currently being re·written by one Duane A. Brown, Contracts Manager. We also note that in
November 1989, pursuant to D.C. Code § 1· 1181.4(e), the Board and DCGH entered into an agreement, the
purpose of which is:

        ... to hear and decide appeals from its Contracting Officer's final decision or failure to
        issue a timely decision on ... contract disputes hetween the Hospital's contractors and the
        Hospital. . .. (emphasis added).

Paragraph 2 of the agreement states, in pertinent part:

        The CAB shall serve as the exclusive administrative tribunal with jurisdiction to hear and
        decide, de novo, an appeal from the final decision of the Hospital's Contracting Officer (or
        his or her failure to issue a final decision within the time required by the Hospital's
        regulations) on ... (2) any contract dispute between the Hospital and its contractors arising
        under or relating to a contract made by the Hospital. ... (emphasis added).

Because there is no time requirement contained in the Disputes provisions of the DCGH regulations (much
less the Disputes Clause), and because these regulations are clearly not in conformance with current law, we
must apply the provisions of the PPA and its implementing regulations to the instant dispute. Moreover, the
purpose of the 1989 agreement between the Hospital and the Board evinces a clear intent for the Board to
hear and decide appeals where the Hospital's contracting officer fails to issue a timely decision on a
contractor's claim.

        We further note the following language in DCGH's agreement with the Board:
                                                                                               (continued ... )
                                                     _9 -           CAB No. D-931, Ccnrcx-Simpson Construction


         As stated earlier herein, section 3803.5 of 27 DCMR requires the contracting officer
to issue a written decision on a claim within 60 days of receipt of the claim. The facts of
the present matter show that appellant's claim for additional costs associated with rubble
removal was submitted to the Hospital on January 31, 1991, pursuant to Article 7 of the
contract. The claim was submitted again on February 20, 1991, wherein appellant made its
first direct request for a final decision, pursuant to Article 7. The evidence also shows that
to date, not only has the contracting officer failed to issue a final decision within the 60-day
time frame, but he has also refused to do so for reasons which have no merit and which
have delayed inordinately a decision on the claim in question. For example, after
demanding re-submission of the claim, the contracting officer requested, in June 1991, that
in answering the appellee's questions, the contractor verify its response. However, neither
the Hospital's nor the District's procurement regulations require such verification.
Nevertheless, one year after the claim was submitted and subsequent to appellant's
extensive additional responses to the appellee's questions, the contracting officer demanded
re-submission of the responses because they were not verified. 101

        In addition, that the contracting officer purportedly needed additional information
on which to render a final decision does not excuse his glaring failure and refusal to issue
a timely final decision. In this regard, the facts clearly show that while he acknowledged
his obligation to render a final decision and stated on more than one occasion his intent to
do so, the contracting officer continued to delay issuance of a final decision. These actions
on the part of the contracting officer placed appellant in an untenable position. As stated
by the Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit in Contract Cleaning Maintenance, Inc. v.
United States, 811 F.2d 586, 592 (Fed. Cir. 1987):

         We know of no requirement in the Disputes Act that a 'claim' must be
         submitted in any particular form or use any particular wording. All that is
         required is that the contractor submit in writing to the contracting officer a
         clear and unequivocal statement that gives the contracting officer adequate
         notice of the basis and amount of the claim.



   2!(... continued)

        ... Recognizing that its current procurement regulations are not in complete harmony with
        this agreement, the Hospital, during the interval between the execution of this agreement
        and the final publication of its conforming procurement regulations, wishes to provide the
        right for. .. all contractors to file a ... claim initially with the Hospital and subsequentlv
        with the CAB in a manner consistent with the provisions of this agreement. (emphasis
        added).

Conveniently, DCGH's motion to dismiss fails to make any reference to the November 1989 agreement.

   10lIt is significant to note here that in its motion to dismiss, DCGH refuses to even acknowledge that the
contractor made a claim before February 7, 1992, the date it re-submitted its verified response to extensive
questions posed by the Hospital. This is absurd, in view of the fact that there is no legal reqUirement for
verification.
                                                     - 10 -          CAB No. D-931, Centex-Simpson Construction


 For sure, a contracting officer may demand more to grant an equitable adjustment, but he
 or she must issue a final decision within 60 days after receipt of a claim which provides
 adequate notice and for which a decision is requested. Bridgewater Construction Corp.,
 V ABCA Nos. 2866, etc., 90-2 BCA ~ 22,764.

        In sum, under the PPA's implementing regulations, the contracting officer is
 required to issue a final decision within 60 days of receipt of the claim. Having failed to
 do so here, the contractor was within its right to deem the claim denied and to appeal to
 this Board on that basis. Thus, we have jurisdiction over this appea1.

        Assuming arguendo that the regulatory 60-day requirement is not applicable, we
look to pre-PPA law for guidance because both the DCGH statute and its procurement
regulations were enacted and promulgated prior to enactment of the PPA. As set forth
earlier herein, the Disputes Clause contained in the contract contains no time limit for
issuance of a contracting officer's final decision. That being the case, we must determine
whether it was reasonable for the contracting officer to have delayed for almost two years
the rendering of a decision on appellant's claim, thereby obviating any requirement for
exhaustion of an administrative remedy prior to appeal to this Board.

        Here, the facts and circumstances support the conclusion that the delay was so long
and so unjustified that the Hospital must be held to have breached its implied covenant to
render a timely and appropriate decision. New York Shipbuilding Corp. v. United States,
385 F.2d 427 (Ct. Cl. 1967); Universal Ecsco Corp. v. United States, 385 F.2d 421 (Ct. C1.
1967). Indeed, the 21 months that passed from the date of initial submission of appellant's
claim to the date of the second notice of appeal, where the contracting officer clearly had
adequate notice of the claim, evinces a situation where no adequate administrative remedy
existed, thereby excusing the appellant from pursuit of the administrative remedy required
by the contract. Universal Ecsco Corp., supra, at 426, citing H.B. Zachry Co. v. United
States, 344 F.2d 352 (Ct. Cl. 1965). See The Dewey Electronics Corp., DOTCAB No.
1224, 82-2 BCA ~ 15,828; Westclox Military Products, ASBCA No. 25592, 81-2 BCA ~
15,270.

       Finally, contrary to the appellee's pOSItIOn, there is no evidence that appellant
waived its right to a contracting officer's final decision Indeed, its expressions of intent
and willingness to negotiate a settlement on the claim do nothing to counter that fac1.1.1.1
The facts show, too, that appellant met the standard for providing adequate notice for the


   Jl/The evidence reveals that it was the contracting officer who unilaterally decided, in March 1992, to
forego issuance of a final decision in order to pursue settlement. He did the same thing in April 1992, but
that time on the basis that he was unwilling to consider Metrex' claim as separate and apart from one filed
by appellant in March 1992, over one year after Metrex' clafm was filed. However, by June 1992, he began
to distance himself from that pOSition by expressly stating that a final decision was forthcoming, in view of
appellant's threats to consider his failure to render a decision a constructive denial of the claim. Faced with
that possibility, the contracting officer acknowledged his Obligation and duty to issue a final decision, while
simultaneously "rejecting" the possibility of a "deemed denial" of the claim, even though the entire record
shows that he had no intention of issuing a final decision.
                                                                  - 11 -   CAB No. D-931, Centex-Simpson Construction


basis and amount of its claim. The fact that in its many letters to the contracting officer,
appellant frequently expressed the hope that the dispute could be settled and suggested
and participated in meetings to accomplish that result does not mean that it had not
submitted a claim or waived its right to a final decision. Contract Cleaning Maintenance,
Inc., 811 F.2d 586, supra; G. Bliudzius Contractors, Inc., ASBCA Nos. 42370, 42369, 92-1
BCA ~ 24,604.

       In conclusion, the facts and circumstances of this matter reveal a blatant and
inexcusable failure on the part of the Hospital to render a contracting officer's final
decision in a timely and appropriate manner, thereby providing appellant a right to appeal
from a deemed denial of its claim and obviating any need for it to exhaust an
administrative remedy which for all practical purposes does not exist. To hold otherwise
would result, as appellant has argued, in a situation where, if it chose to do so, DCGH
would never issue a final decision; and a contractor would never have the right to appeal.
That would be a patently absurd consequence and would make a mockery of the
procurement system and the law.

      Consequently, for the reasons set forth herein, and based upon all of the facts and
circumstances, it is hereby

             ORDERED, that the Hospital's motion to dismiss be, and the same is, DENIED.


D A TE: _ _Ap,--,r;;.. .:i;;.. .:1,--=--9 -=1c:;..9-=-.;93=---_
                                       <-'




CONCUR:
