                  GOVERNMENT OF THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA
                         CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD



APPEAL OF:

       A.S. McGAUGHAN CO., INC.                           )
                                                          )      CAB No. D-926
       Under Contract No. 87-0038-AA-2-0-LA               )



      For the Appellant: Charles F. Mitchell, Esquire. For the Government: Mark D.
Back, Assistant Corporation Counsel.

      Opinion by Administrative Judge Terry Hart Lee, with Administrative Judges Zoe
Bush and Benjamin B. Terner concurring.


                   OPINION AND ORDER ON MOTION TO DISMISS

       On August 25, 1992, A.S. McGaughan Co., Inc. ("appellant") filed an appeal from a
written "presumption of denial" of its claims, issued on April 15, 1991, and received by
appellant on April 22, 1991.

        On October 7, 1992, the District of Columbia ("appellee" or "District") filed a motion
to dismiss, on the ground that the Board lacks jurisdiction over the appeal based on the
allegation that the appeal was untimely filed. Citing D.C. Code §l-1188.5(c) and (d), the
District argues that the 90-day limitation for appeal to the Board runs either from the date
on which a contractor receives a decision on its claim by the Director, Department of
Administrative Services (DAS) or from the date on which a failure of the Director to render
a decision is deemed to be a denial of the claim. Furthermore, relying on the Board's
decision in Belcon, Inc., CAB No. D-829, June 14, 1990, 38 DCR 3090 (May 1991), the
appellee argues that in the absence of the DAS decision, the time for appeal begins to run
from the contractor's receipt of DAS' written presumption of denial, setting forth the
contractor's right of appeal. As a result, the District contends that the latest date on which
the appellant should have filed its appeal was July 21, 1991.

        On November 9, 1992, appellant submitted its memorandum of points and
authorities in opposition to the motion to dismiss. Therein, appellant contends that the
District's argument is based on two incorrect premises: (1) that the time for appeal to the
Board begins to run when DAS' failure to issue a decision is deemed to be a denial of the
claim; and (2) that the April 15, 1991, letter to appellant, notifying it of the status of its
claim, constituted a final written decision within the meaning of 27 DCMR §3806.7 (July
1988).
                                              . 2 -              CAB No D-926, A.S McGaughan Co, Inc


       Appellant's argument is based in part on its interpretation of D.C. Code §§1-1189.3
through 1-1189.5 and the implementing regulations. Specifically, appellant asserts that
nothing in the Procurement Practices Act of 1985, D.C. Code §§1-1181.1, et seq. (PPA) or
the implementing regulations provides that the contractor's right to appeal from a "deemed
denial" of its claim is mandatory or that the 90-day limitation period set forth in D.C. Code
§l-1189.4(a) begins when the right to appeal from a "deemed denial" of the claim accrues.

       Citing the decision of the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit in
Pathman Construction Co. v. United States, 817 F.2d 1573 (Fed. Cir. 1987), and comparing
the language contained in D.C. Code §l-1188.5(d) with that contained in section 6(c)(5) of
the Contract Disputes Act of 1978, 41 U.S.C. §605(c)(5) (CDA), appellant contends that the
"deemed denied" provision of the statute merely authorizes a contractor to file an appeal.
It does not mandate such an action.

       Appellant further contends that appellee's reliance on Belcon is misplaced because
not only did the Board defer analysis of D.C. Code §1188.5(d), but it expressly stated that
the position of the appellant (Belcon) conformed to the weight of authority.

        Finally, appellant states that the April 15, 1991, letter from the Director, DAS,
advising it of the status of its claim, cannot be considered a final decision which would
trigger the commencement of the 90-day limitations period. This is so because it does not
conform to the requirements for a final decision within 27 DCMR §3806.7, supra.

       On November 17, 1992, the District submitted a reply memorandum in support of
its motion to dismiss. Therein, appellee asserts that appellant mischaracterized the
District's position and failed to point out the critical differences between the PPA and the
CDA.

        First, the District states that it did not claim that the April 15,1991, letter from DAS
to appellant constituted a final written decision. Appellee believes that a final written
decision by DAS is not relevant to its argument. It reiterated its position, relying on
Belcon, that the time for appeal began to run from the date of receipt of the April 15, 1991,
letter which informed appellant of its right to appeal based on a "presumption of denial"
of its claim.

        Second, the District argues that Pathman and the decisions in accord, which
interpreted the provisions of the CDA, are distinguishable from the PPA because of the
intermediate level of review provided in the PPA, and also because the appeal rights are
different under the CDA.

        Third, the appellee argues that the language in the CDA which is comparable to that
set forth in D.C. Code §l-1189.4(a) does not take into account the "deemed denied" decision
scenario contemplated in D.C. Code §l-1189.4(a). In essence, the appellee claims that
under the CDA, the limitation period for appeal begins to run on a "deemed denied"
                                                               CAB No
                                             . 3 -                      V-926< A-S McGaugh.in Co , Inc


decision on receipt of a written final decision by the contractor; while under the PPA, actual
receipt of a written final decision by the contractor is not necessary.

       Finally, the appellee asserts that Belcon adopted a "reasonableness" standard in
determining the time in which the limitations period begins to run. Contends the District,
while it may have been reasonable for the contractor in Belcon to have expected a final
decision after six days of hearing before DAS, appellant here has shown nothing which
would rebut the conclusion that it failed to assert its rights in a timely manner.

        On November 20, 1992, appellant filed its Reply Memorandum in Opposition to the
District's Motion to Dismiss. Therein, appellant contends that with respect to the District's
assertion that a final written decision by DAS is irrelevant to its argument, the appellee
actually wants the Board to give some "procedural effect" to the April 15, 1991, letter as a
proper final decision. Appellant claims that nothing in the PPA or the implementing
regulations permits the Board to create this type of "hybrid" situation.

       Appellant also asserts that the District's attempt to distinguish the two-step appeal
process under the CDA from the three-step process under the PPA is neither compelling nor
relevant. Appellant declares that the interpretation of the nearly identical language of both
statutes is the relevant issue.

       With respect to appellee's argument concerning the introductory language of D.C.
Code §l-1189.4(a), appellant contends that this language does nothing more than
acknowledge a contractor's right to appeal from a "deemed denial" of its claim, and that if
anything, the language indicates that an appeal from a deemed denial is not governed by
the 90-day limitations period.

       Finally, appellant argues that the facts of this case establish that it meets the
"standard of reasonableness" enunciated in Belcon.

                                        DECISION

       Section 904(a) of the PPA, D.C. Code §l-1189.4(a), states:

      Except as provided in section 805, within 90 days from the date of receipt of
      a decision of the Director, the contractor may appeal the decision to the
      Board, (emphasis added).

      Section 805(c) and (d) of the PPA, D.C. Code §l-1188.5(c) and (d), states:

      Within 90 days of receipt of a claim over $50,000, the Director shall issue a
      decision, whenever possible taking into account factors such as the size and
      complexity of the claim and the adequacy of the information in support of the
      claim provided by the contractor.
                                                                 CAB No
                                              . 4 -                       D-y26, A.S McGaughan Co, Inc


       Any failure by the Director to issue a decision on a contract claim within the
       required time period will be deemed to be a denial of the claim, and will
       authorize the commencement of an appeal on the claim as otherwise provided
       in this title, (emphasis added).

       The only decision of the Board, or our appellate tribunal, that we can find that even
broaches an interpretation of sections 904(a) and 805(c) and (d) of the PPA is Belcon, Inc.,
supra, 38 OCR 3090. There, at pages 3092-3093, the Board stated:

       Although we defer our analysis and decision of whether §l-1188.5(d)
       mandates a 90-day appeal period, as DPW argues, or merely authorizes an
       appeal within a reasonable time, Belcon's position, the weight of
       argumentation lies heavily with Belcon.

The footnote following that statement says:

       Although the PPA was not enacted so as to conform to federal law and
       precedent, we note that §l-1188.5(d) does use identical language dealing with
       deemed decisions as that contained in the federal Contract Disputes Act of
       1978, 41 USC [sic] §605(c)(3) and §605(c)(5). Every court decision and
       federal government contract law board cited by the parties interprets this
       language (a deemed decision will 'authorize the commencement of an appeal')
       as Belcon advocates, (emphasis added).

Id. at 3093.

       Consequently, we will review the comparable language of the CDA and the pertinent
federal decisions to assist us in rendering our decision in this matter.

       Section 6(c)(l) of the CDA states:

       A contracting officer shall issue a decision on any submitted claim of $50,000
       or less within sixty days from his receipt of a written request from the
       contractor that a decision be rendered within that period. For claims of more
       than $50,000, the contractor shall certify that the claim is made in good faith,
       that the supporting data are accurate and complete to the best of his
       knowledge and belief, and that the amount requested accurately reflects the
       contract adjustment for which the contractor believes the government is
       liable.

       Section 6(c)(2) states:

       A contracting officer shall, within sixty days of receipt of a submitted certified
       claim over $50,000--
                                            . 5 -              CAB No D-926, A.S McGaughan Co, Inc


          (A) issue a decision; or

         (B) notify the contractor of the time in which a decision will be issued.

       Section 6(c)(5) states:

       Any failure by the contracting officer to issue a decision on a contract claim
       within the period required will be deemed to be a decision by the contracting
       officer denying the claim and will authorize the commencement of an appeal
       or suit on the claim as otherwise provided in this Act.... (emphasis added).

41 U.S.C. §605(c)(l), (2) and (5). Section 7 of the CDA provides that within 90 days from
the date of receipt of the contracting officer's decision under section 6, the contractor may
appeal the decision to any agency board of contract appeals. 41 U.S.C. §606. Section
10(a)(l) and (3) of the CDA provides that in lieu of an appeal of a contracting officer's
decision to an agency board, the contractor may bring suit directly on the claim in the
United States Claims Court, within 12 months from the date of receipt of the decision by
the contractor. 41 U.S.C. §609(a)(l) and (3).

       Section 903 of the PPA, D.C. Code §1-1189.3, states, in pertinent part:

      The Board shall be the exclusive hearing tribunal for, and shall have
      jurisdiction to review and determine de novo:



          (2) Any appeal by an aggrieved party from a determination by the
       Director which is authorized by this act.

       Section 904(a) of the PPA, D.C. Code §l-1189.4(a), states:

      Except as provided in section 80S, within 90 days from the date of receipt of
      a decision of the Director, the contractor may appeal the decision to the
      Board, (emphasis added).

       Section 805(c) and (d) states:

      Within 90 days of receipt of a claim over $50,000, the Director shall issue a
      decision, whenever possible taking into account factors such as the size and
      complexity of the claim and the adequacy of the information in support of the
      claim provided by the contractor.

      Any failure by the Director to issue a decision on a contract claim within the
      required time period will be deemed to be a denial of the claim, and will
                                                     . (J .                 CAB No D-926, A.S VfcGaughan Co, Inc


         authorize the commencement of an appeal on the claim as otherwise provided
         in this title, (emphasis added).

B.C. Code §M188.5(c) and (d).

        While there are certainly differences between the two statutes with respect to the
obligations of the contracting officer to render a decision within a required time period and
in a particular manner versus the obligations of the Director, DAS to take virtually the
same actions on a contractor's claim, there is virtually no difference between the statutes
concerning a contractor's rights where the, statutorily-authorized official fails to issue a
decision within the required period of time. Indeed, under both the CDA and PPA, where
such a failure occurs, it is deemed to be a denial of the claim and will authorize
commencement of an appeal.

        Furthermore, under the CDA, the required time period in which the contracting
officer must issue a decision (on a certified claim over $50,000) is 60 days. 41 U.S.C.
§605(c)(2)(A). Under the PPA, that time period for the Director is lengthened to 90 days.
D.C. Code §l-1188.5(c). Under both statutes, once the authorized official issues a written
decision on a claim within the respective time limitations, the contractor has 90 days from
its date of receipt of the written decision to appeal to the board of contract appeals.
Compare D.C. Code §l-1189.4(a) with 41 U.S.C. §606. However, where no decision is issued
(and the deciding official does not take advantage of his/her right to an extension of time)i;
within the required time period, commencement of an appeal is authorized. Compare D.C.
Code §l-1188.5(d) with 41 U.S.C. §605(c)(5).

        Here, the District argues that section l-1188.5(d) of the D.C. Code authorizes appeal
where no decision is issued, but only within 90 days of the contractor's receipt of notice that
no decision will be issued, relying on the language of section l-1189.4(a). Appellant, on the
other hand, argues that the 90-day time limit of section l-1189.4(a) is applicable only to
receipt of a written decision from the Director and that the language of section l-1188.5(d)
does not mandate an appeal but merely permits one, if the contractor so desires.

       We conclude that the language of the PPA, its legislative history and its basic
purposes show that the 90-day limitations period begins to run only after the Director, DAS
has issued a written final decision on the contractor's claim. Stated another way, where the
Director, DAS does not issue a decision within the 90-day statutory time period, a
contractor is permitted, but not required, to commence an appeal. Pathman Construction

    -^By statute, a contracting officer in the federal sector is required to extend the 60-day time period by
notifying the contractor of the time within which a decision will be issued on a claim over $50,000, if a
decision cannot be made within that time period. 41 U.S.C. §605(c)(2)(H). However, the PPA's implementing
regulations give the Director, DAS the authority (but not a mandate) to extend the time for issuing a decision,
either by consent of the parties or by a determination by the Director that "compelling reasons" require
additional time. 27 DCMR §3806.5(a) and (b).
                                                     . 7                   CAB No D-926, A.S McGaugh.m Co, Inc


Co., Inc. v. United States, 817 F.2d 1573, supra.

       The plain language of D.C. Code §l-1188.5(d) provides the contractor with an option,
or permission, to go forward with an appeal when the Director, DAS has not issued a timely
decision. Pathman, supra, at 1577; The Vemo Company v. United States, 9 Cl. Ct. 217, 220
(1985). As stated in Pathman at 1577 and adopted herein, with respect to the Director,
DAS:

        . . . The provision is designed to enable the contractor to obtain a judicial
        determination of its claim (or a determination by a board of contract appeals,
        if the contractor follows that procedure) without awaiting the decision of a
        contracting officer who has failed to render a decision within the specified
        time limits. . . .

Furthermore, nothing in the language of section l-1188.5(d) evinces an intent on the part
of the District of Columbia Council to compel a contractor to use it. Thus, the contractor's
right to institute an appeal under the "deemed denied" provision is permissive, not
mandatory.

       In addition, if the District of Columbia Council had intended a contractor to bring
an appeal within 90 days of the Director's failure to issue a timely decision, presumably it
would have said so explicitly. For example, section 805(a) of the PPA, D.C. Code §1-
1188.5(a) provides that all claims by a contractor shall be in writing and shall be submitted
to the Director for a decision. Similarly, section 805(e)(l), D.C. Code §l-1188.5(e)(l)
(concerning a contractor's inability to support its claim, attributable to misrepresentation
of fact or fraud) provides that a contractor shall be liable to the District for a certain
amount in costs. However, in section 805(d), D.C. Code §l-1188.5(d), the District of
Columbia Council used the permissive language "will authorize."-7

       As in Pathman, our conclusion is further buttressed by the language in D.C. Code
§l-1188.5(c) and 27 DCMR §3806.7 (which requires receipt by the contractor of a final
written decision of the Director within 90 days of the Director's receipt of a claim over
$50,000). As the Federal Circuit so aptly pointed out:

        'In a "deemed denied" situation, there is no "decision of the contracting
        officer" that the contractor receives. The concept of "receipt ... of the
        decision of the contracting officer" involves the actual physical receipt of that


    -'To lend support to its decision in Pathman, the Federal Circuit cited the definition of the word
"authorize" as set forth in Webster's Ninth New Collegiate Dictionary 117 (1985) (cited in Blake Construction
Co., Inc., VABCA Nos. 2443, 2444, 87-1 BCA 5[19,523) as meaning "sanction", "empower", "justify", all in sense
permissive. We have no reason to dispute this definition. See Webster's II New Riverside University
Dictionary 139 (1984) ("authorize" means: [1] "To give authority or power to"; [2] "To approve or permit:
SANCTION"; [3] "To be sufficient grounds for.").
                                                       - 8 -                  CAli No D-926, 4.S VlcGaughan Co, Inc


         decision by the contractor. . . .'

Pathman, supra, at 1577 citing Turner Construction Company v. United States, 9 Cl. Ct.
214, 216 (1985). The Federal Circuit went on to say:

         '[t]here can be no ... actual "receipt" of a decision which does not truly exist
         but whose existence is only "deemed" for the purpose of authorizing suit on
         the undecided claims.'

In essence, "[t]he 'receipt' of the contracting officer's decision by the contractor is the
critical event that starts the running of the limitations period." (emphasis added).
Pathman, supra, at 1577. The legislative history of the PPA of 1985 does not specifically
address the intent of the District of Columbia Council in enacting the 90-day limitation for
the Director's decision on claims over $50,000. The only indication of the District of
Columbia Council's intent of which we are aware is contained in the October 16, 1985,
COUNCIL OF THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA REPORI ("REPORT") which accompanied Bill 6-191,
"District of Columbia Procurement Practices Act of 1985." As part of the Background and
Purpose section of the REPORT, there is a brief description of the authority of the Director.
It states, in part:

        ... The Director has the authority to render decisions on claims arising from
        an aggrieved contractor, thus providing an administrative mechanism for
        resolving disputes. Appeals of these decisions are made to the Contract
        Appeals Board.

        Our review of this "administrative mechanism for resolving disputes", as well as the
entire PPA, leads us to conclude that the disputes provisions were modeled almost
exclusively on the CDA of 1978 and that the procurement regulations set forth in Title 27
of the DCMR were modeled in large measure on the Federal Acquisition Regulations (FAR),
48 C.F.R. Chapter 1.^


    -/In its reply to appellant's opposition to the District's motion to dismiss, the District argues that the PPA
is distinguishable from the CDA because of the intermediate level of review found in the PPA. Presumably,
the appellee is referring to a decision by the contracting officer, prior to submitting a formal claim to the
Director, DAS. That distinction certainly does exist, but it is not found in the statute; and given the dearth
of legislative history on this "intermediate level of review", we can surmise that the District of Columbia
Council wished to emphasize administrative resolution over litigation.

         Section 3803 of 27 DCMR sets forth the requirements for a contractor's presentation of its claim to
the contracting officer. These requirements encompass an attempt at un informal resolution, to submission
of a formal claim to the contracting officer, to further attempts at resolution, to issuance of a final decision
by the contracting officer. There is no right to appeal to the Board from a final decision of the contracting
officer. However, the contractor may appeal thereafter to the Director, DAS within 60 days of receipt of the
contracting officer's final decision or within 10 days after the 60-day time period in which the contracting
                                                                                                  (continued...)
                                                                             CAB No
                                                      . 9 -                           D-926, A.S McGaughan Co, Inc


         Turning again to section 805(c) of the PPA, that section states:

         Within 90 days of receipt of a claim over $50,000, the Director shall issue a
         decision, whenever possible taking into account factors such as the size and
         complexity of the claim and the adequacy of the information in support of the
         claim provided by the contractor.

In comparison, section 6(a)(2) of the CDA provides that for a certified claim over $50,000,
the contracting officer has within 60 days of receipt of a claim to issue a decision (or to
notify the contractor when such a decision would be issued). Section 6(a)(4) requires the
contracting officer to issue a decision within a reasonable time during this 60-day period,
"taking into account such factors as the size and complexity of the claim and the adequacy
of the information in support of the claim provided by the contractor."-7 Thus, the
language of section 805(c) of the PPA is almost verbatim to the language in sections 6(a)(2)
and 6(a)(4) of the CDA; and outside of the longer period of time for issuance of the
Director's decision under the PPA versus that given to the contracting officer under the
CDA, there is nothing in either statute to our knowledge that requires the contractor to
appeal after the time limit for rendering a decision has expired. Furthermore, we can find
nothing in the legislative history that would lead us to conclude that the 90-day limitation is
automatically extended (or relaxed) simply because a case may be large or complex
or both.-7


     -(... continued)
officer fails to issue a written decision on the formal claim. Id. §§3803.5 and 3804.1.

        Because we are dealing here with the right to appeal to the Board, we fail to see the government's
point concerning the significance of this level of review.

         It is interesting to note that under our procurement regulations, the contracting officer has 60 days
in which to issue a decision on a contractor's formal claim, with no requirement or authority to extend that
60-day time period. This is the same period of time for issuance of a contracting officer's final decision under
the CDA.

          R.G. Robbins Co., Inc.. ASBCA No. 26521, 82-1 BCA f 15,643 at 77,273-77,274 (wherein the ASBCA
stated that the "reasonable time" within which the contracting officer must render a decision is more or less
within the 60-day time period, depending on the facts and circumstances.

    -'The District asks us to apply the "reasonableness standard" enunciated in Belcon to the facts of this
case, arguing that while it may have been reasonable for the contractor in Belcon to have expected a DAS
final decision after six days of hearing, appellant here has shown nothing to rebut the conclusion that it failed
to assert its rights in a timely manner.

         Simply stated, we cannot make sense of this argument. Apparently, Belcon adopted a "reasonableness
standard" as a "substitute standard" for the period beyond the 90-day time limitation for DAS to issue a final
decision, where a case may be sizeable or complex and cannot be decided within the statutory time frame.
                                                                                                (continued...)
                                                     - 10 -                 CAB No D-926, A.S McGaughan Co, Inc


       We must assume that the District of Columbia Council purposely adopted the
language of the CDA and was well aware of the intent and purpose of the CDA and FAR
in developing our statute and regulations. Therefore, by reading the statutes in pari
materia, and in view of the purposes of both statutes and the glaring similarities between
them, it is most unlikely that the District of Columbia Council intended that the 90-day
period to file an appeal to the Board begins on the "deemed denial" of a claim,"... which
by definition the contracting officer never furnished to the contractor and which the
contractor never received." Pathman, supra, at 1578.

       Moreover, one of the major purposes of the PPA is "[t]o insure the fair and equitable
treatment of all persons who deal with the procurement system of the District government."
D.C. Code §1-1181.1 (a) (7). One way of doing so was the establishment of the administrative
mechanism for the Director to resolve contract disputes. In our opinion, the position
espoused by the District herein would impede, rather than promote, that purpose.
Application of the government's position would force a contractor to appeal to the Board
before it had an adequate chance to resolve the factual and legal issues with the agency
involved. In this regard, the PPA expressly recognizes that many claims submitted to the
Director are sizeable and complex and require detailed and protracted analysis before the
parties can negotiate a settlement. Further, initial submissions may often be inadequate
and more information is often required before a claim can be resolved.

       Unlike the CDA, however, the PPA does not require the Director to notify the
contractor if he/she cannot make a decision within 90 days. Neither does the applicable
provision of the regulations. 27 DCMR §3806.5. In fact, the regulations provide that the
Director may obtain consent of the parties to extend the statutory 90-day time limit, or
he/she may determine in writing (with notice to the contractor) that "compelling reasons"
necessitate a longer period. Nevertheless, if either course of action is taken, and a written
notice of extension is issued, a claim is presumed denied ". . . if a decision has not been
issued within sixty (60) calendar days after the expiration of the applicable statutory
deadline under §3806.4."^ Jd.

        Thus, under the PPA and implementing regulations, a contractor has three options:
(1) it can wait 90 days for a Director's decision and then appeal to the Board if no decision
is received; (2) it can wait an additional 60 days beyond the 90-day period, assuming that


    -/(...continued)
Belcon, supra, at 3092. However, Belcon does not at any point indicate the Board's consideration of
applicability of the regulations which permit the Director to extend the period for issuance of a decision, by
issuing a written notice of extension based on either consent of the parties or by a written determination of
"compelling reasons". 27 DCMR §3806.5. This failure to recognize the Director's regulatory authority to
extend the time period by written notice bodes ill for the \alue of the decision as precedent.

    -/Section 3806.4 of 27 DCMR refers the reader to section 805 of the PPA, which sets a 60-day time limit
for a decision on claims under $50,000 and a 90-day time limit for a decision on claims over $50,000.
                                                      - H   -                 CAB No D-926, A.S McGaughan Co, Inc


 the Director follows 27 DCMR §3806.5 and then appeal from a "presumed denial"; or (3)
 it can wait for a written Director's decision, no matter how long it may take.27 All that is
 necessary to start the 90-day time period running is the Director's issuance of a written
 final decision on a claim. Absent such a decision, the contractor's options come into play.

       We agree with the Federal Circuit in Pathman that "[t]he government cannot take
advantage of its own failure to perform its statutory obligations." Id. at 1579. While the
record does not reflect when appellant herein submitted its claim to the Director, it was at
least 90 days prior to the April 15, 1991, letter. Furthermore, that letter is clear in two
regards: (1) a final decision was delayed because of the resignation of the Claims Officer;
and (2) the notice of the right to appeal was expressly permissive, to wit: ... you may file
an appeal of the Contracting Officer's decision with the Contract Appeals Board based on
a presumption of denial of your claim." (emphasis added). Had the appeal right been
mandatory, the Director would certainly have so stated.

        In its motion to dismiss, the District, placing reliance on Belcon, argues that in the
absence of a Director's decision, the time for appeal begins to run from the contractor's
receipt of DAS' written presumption of denial of a claim. This argument necessarily implies
two things: (1) that the Director is required to notify the contractor in writing of a
presumption of denial; and (2) that the Director's notice constitutes a final decision,
appealable to the Board pursuant to D.C. Code §l-1189.4(a). Neither implication has
merit.-7

       First, neither the statute nor the regulations requires the Director to notify the
contractor, in writing or otherwise, of a presumption of denial of its claim. Indeed, the
meaning of the word "presumption" denotes "acceptance" or "belief. In legal parlance, it
means: "An inference as to the truth of an allegation or proposition based on probable
reasoning in the absence of or prior to actual proof or disproof." (emphasis added).
Webster's II New Riverside University Dictionary 982 (1984). Consequently, a "presumption
of denial" stands on its own; notice of such is incongruous with the word's accepted
meaning.-7



    -7Nowhere in the PPA is the Director, DAS given the option of deciding not to issue a decision on a claim.

     -7In its reply to the appellant's opposition to the District's motion to dismiss, the appellee contends that
it did not claim (in the motion to dismiss) that the April 15, 1991, letter constituted a final written decision
of the Director, DAS. Appellee went on to declare that a final written decision by DAS is not relevant to its
argument. If the District actually believes its own argument, then the April 15, 1991, letter is only that--u
letter advising appellant of the status of its claim--and nothing more. In this regard, the support for the
District's motion dissolves.

    -/Essentially, under the statute and regulations, there is no such thing as a "deemed denied decision."
This is so because where a presumption of a denial occurs, there is no decision on a claim, i.e., there is no
conclusion reached or judgment made on a matter under consideration.
                                           - 12 -             CAB No D-926, A.S McGaughan Co, Inc


        Second, a "presumption of denial" of a claim simply cannot, under the applicable
regulations, constitute the Director's final written decision. 27 DCMR §3806.7. The
regulations set out six requirements for the Director's decision. Here, the April 15, 1991,
letter to appellant, advising it of the status of the claim, simply does not comply with the
regulatory requirements. Where that is the case, the running of the limitations period is
not triggered. Vepco, Inc., ASBCA No. 26993, 82-2 BCA 5[15,824; R.G. Robbins Co., Inc.,
ASBCA No. 26521, 82-1 BCA J[15,643. See Pathman, supra, at 1578.

       Therefore, based upon all of the facts and circumstances and the authorities cited
herein, the District's motion to dismiss is DENIED; and it is hereby

      ORDERED, that in accordance with Rule 203, the District file its Appeal File, within
30 days of receipt of this Order; and it is

      FURTHER ORDERED, that in accordance with Rule 204, the appellant shall file its
complaint with the Board, within 30 days of receipt of this Order; and it is

       FURTHER ORDERED, that in accordance with Rule 203.3, the appellant supplement
the District's Appeal File, if necessary; and it is

       FURTHER ORDERED, that in accordance with Rule 205, the District file its Answer
to the appellant's complaint.



DATE:    December 10, 1992
                                                        TERRY HART
                                                        Administrative Judge


CONCUR:




       SH
     Administrative Judge



#*
BENJAMIN B. TERNER
Administrative Judge
                                          - 13-   CAB No D-926. A.S McGaughan Co, Inc




Copies to:   Charles F. Mitchell, Esquire
             Dunnells, Duval & Porter
             2100 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W.
             Washington, DC 20037-3202

             Mark D. Back, Assistant
              Corporation Counsel
             Public Works Division
             2000 14th Street, N.W., 6th Fl.
             Washington, DC 20009
