                     GOVERNMENT OF THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA
                           CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD

APPEAL OF:

       UNFOLDMENT, INC.                                )
                                                       )       CAB No. D-1062
       Under Contract No. 7KGC09                       )

      For the Appellant, Unfoldment, Inc.: Brian Lederer, Esq. For the District: Andrew J.
Saindon and Jennifer L. Longmeyer, Assistants Corporation Counsel, DC.

      Order by Chief Administrative Judge Lorilyn Simkins with Administrative Judge Matthew S.
Watson, concurring.

                     ORDER ON MOTION FOR RECONSIDERATION

        Appellant has timely moved for reconsideration of the Board’s Order, dated March 20, 2002,
which dismissed or denied all of Unfoldment’s claims, except for unpaid invoices, Quick Payment
Act and simple interest. Unfoldment asserts that because of “new evidence not previously available
to this Board” that the Board should reconsider its decision that the contract was not a multi-year
contract. Appellant also asks for reconsideration of the Board’s decision to permit a settlement letter
written by the Contracting Officer Milton Grady to be used as evidence of Unfoldment’s entitlement
to certain closing and initial costs. Finally, the appellant requests reconsideration of the Board’s
dismissal of Unfoldment’s allegations of bad faith by CFSA.

       The Board Rule 117.1 (49 D.C. Reg. 2094-2095 (Mar. 8, 2002)) provides:

       A party to an appeal or a protest may by motion request the Board to reconsider its decision
or order for the reasons stated below:

       (1)     to clarify the decision;
       (b)     to present newly discovered evidence which by due diligence could not have
               been presented to the Board prior to the rendering of its decision;
       (2)     if the decision contains typographical, numerical, technical or other clear
               errors that are evident on their face;
       (d)     if the decision contains errors of fact or law, except that parties shall not
               present arguments substantially identical to those already considered and
               rejected by the Board.

       Contrary to Appellant’s assertion that the RFP is “new evidence” which the Board should
consider, the legal standard associated with newly discovered evidence requires that by due
diligence the evidence could not have been presented to the Board prior to the rendering of its
decision. Board Rule 117.1(b). In making its argument for reconsideration, Unfoldment has failed to
demonstrate that the RFP could not have by due diligence been presented prior to the rendering of
the Board’s decision. See American Continental Ins. Co. v. Pooya, 666 A.2d 1193 (D.C. 1995). It is
                                               2              Unfoldment, Inc. CAB No. D-1062

clear that the RFP has been available to appellant since it bid on the contract in 1997. Appellant
may not use a motion for reconsideration to furnish information that was available to it but not
submitted, at the time of the original decision.

        Unfoldment also argues that the government had the burden of furnishing the RFP to the
Board via the Appeal File. Appellant is correct that the government is required to assemble and
transmit to the Board an appeal file consisting of all documents pertinent to the appeal. Board Rule
203.1, 49 D.C. Reg. 2101. However, an appellant is also required, after receipt of the appeal file, to
transmit to the Board any documents which it considers relevant to the appeal. Board Rule 203.3, 49
D.C. Reg. 2101. Further, the Board may require either party to supplement the appeal file. Board
Rule 203.4. During a telephone conference on October 11, 2001, both parties agreed and the Board
orally ordered that the government file the Appeal File by November 1, 2001, and that the appellant
by November 15, 2001 file any documents that it considered to be relevant to its appeal. Appellant
had ample opportunity to file the RFP with the Board, but failed to do so. Appellant cannot now
claim that it had no responsibility to submit the RFP to the Board or that the decision on the nature
of the contract should be reopened because the government did not supply the RFP for the record.
We therefore deny appellant’s request for reconsideration of its claim that this was a multi-year
contract.

        Appellant also requests the Board to reconsider its ruling that Mr. Grady’s settlement letter
could not be used as evidence to prove that Unfoldment’s contract was terminated for cause or
convenience. Appellant’s argument is not based on any newly discovered evidence or substantially
different legal theory than it presented before. The Board’s decision was based on Pyne v. Jamaica
Nutrition Holding Ltd., 497 A.2d 1118 (D.C. 1985), a Court of Appeals decision holding that offers
of compromise or settlement agreements may not be used to prove liability for a claim or its amount.
 There is no basis for appellant’s request for reconsideration, and it is therefore denied.

         Finally, Appellant fails to raise any new argument regarding bad faith. The Board dismissed
Appellant’s unsupported allegations of bad faith because appellant’s arguments were irrelevant in
light of the fact that Appellant had failed to make an evidentiary showing, via affidavit or otherwise
to demonstrate that CFSA had a specific intent to injure the appellant or that CFSA’s actions were
motivated by malice. See District of Columbia v. Organization for Environmental Growth, Inc., 700
A. 2d 185, 199-201 (D.C. 1997). Accordingly, we deny appellant’s request for reconsideration.

       SO ORDERED.

       DATE: July 30, 2002                                    /s/ Lorilyn E. Simkins
                                                              LORILYN E. SIMKINS
                                                              Chief Administrative Judge

/s/ Matthew S. Watson
MATTHEW S. WATSON
Administrative Judge
