                     GOVERNMENT OF THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA
                           CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD

APPEAL OF:

       UNFOLDMENT, INC.                               )
                                                      )       CAB No. D-1062
       Under Contract No. 7KGC09                      )

        For the Appellant, Unfoldment, Inc.: Kemi Morton Reed, Esq., and Brian Lederer, Esq. For
the District: Andrew J. Saindon and Jennifer L. Longmeyer, Assistants Corporation Counsel, DC.

       Order by Chief Administrative Judge Lorilyn E. Simkins with Administrative Judge Matthew
S. Watson, concurring.

               ORDER ON MOTION TO DISMISS/SUMMARY JUDGMENT

        Appellant, Unfoldment, Inc., has filed an amended complaint alleging that its multiyear
contract with the District of Columbia Child and Family Services Agency (“CFSA” or “Agency”)
was improperly terminated. Unfoldment requests award for: outstanding invoices for services
during the contract period from July 1, 1997 to November 4, 1998; adjusted invoices; Quick
Payment Act interest on late payments and simple interest; costs associated with closing the program
from October 28, 1998 to December 28, 1998; unexpired lease payments and associated costs;
unexpired vehicle lease payments and insurance costs; repairs caused by damages by CFSA clients,
window and door replacement costs ordered by contract monitors; furniture and equipment
purchased for the program; and attorneys’ fees. The District has moved to dismiss the appeal or in
the alternative for summary judgment asserting that there is no cognizable claim upon which relief
can be granted based upon the undisputed facts set forth in this appeal, and that there are no genuine
issues of material facts in dispute. We dismiss or deny all claims, except for Unfoldment’s claim for
unpaid invoices and QPA and simple interest.

                                            Background

       On July 1, 1997, Unfoldment entered into a one-year, fixed-price, indefinite quantity
contract with four one-year options with CFSA to provide Group Home Continuing Foster Care
Services to adolescent wards of the District. Unfoldment characterizes this contract as a multi-year
contract. The services were to include “board and care, clothing, education, vocational training and
guidance to help them reach their maximum potential.” (Contract, p.1). The Contract established a
maximum contract ceiling amount of $1,728,896.00 and a maximum number of thirty (30) children
who could reside in Unfoldment’s group homes at any one time. The placement of a minimum
number of children was not set forth in the Contract. The per diem rate for each child was set at
$157.89. The Contract provides that payment was to be made only for the documented number of
children who were in the facility. (Contract, Article XIV).

         The first year contract term ended on June 30, 1998, at which time the Agency exercised a
partial option extending the contract term through September 30, 1998. On or about September 30,
                                                 -2-                   Unfoldment, Inc., CAB No. D-1062

1998, the Agency extended the Contract by one month, until October 31, 1998. The General
Receiver notified Unfoldment in a letter, dated October 28, 1998, that its services would no longer
be required, “effective 60 days from the date of this letter.” This letter exercised one final option of
two additional months until December 28, 1998.

        On December 4, 1998, Unfoldment filed an appeal with the Board, setting forth dozens of
allegations in a 28-page Complaint. For almost three years after the filing of the initial appeal, no
activity took place at the Board while Unfoldment and CFSA pursued settlement discussions.
Sometime in October 2000, CFSA, which was operated under a Receivership at the time,1 paid
Unfoldment $236,925.58 as a “partial settlement” of its claim. (Amended Complain, & 10, and
Exh.14). A letter from Milton Grady, then-Deputy Receiver of Operations for CFSA, memorializes
the payment and describes it as costs associated with the termination of Unfoldment’s contract.
(Emphasis added). Mr. Grady mentions in his letter that he was unable to substantiate all of the
claimed costs, that his review included consideration of information forwarded to him on September
27, 2000, and that this payment represented only a partial settlement for the costs which had been
substantiated. According to the letter, the $236,925.58 represented payment for proposal preparation
costs of $12,000, facility lease termination costs of $23,000, and $201,825.58 for outstanding
invoices. Although Mr. Grady’s letter invited Unfoldment to present evidence of other costs, no
further payments were made and according to both parties further negotiations were unsuccessful.

       On October 18, 2001, Unfoldment filed an amended complaint. The 26- page, 107-
paragraph Amended Complaint reorganizes Appellant’s claims somewhat, but still includes counts
which are not cognizable by this Board, and a great deal of material that is irrelevant.

       On November 3, 2001, the District filed a motion to dismiss or in the alternative a motion for
summary judgment. On December 21, 2001, Appellant filed its opposition to the District’s motion.
Appellee replied on January 18, 2002. Appellant filed an opposition to the District’s reply on
February 1, 2002.

                      Motion to Dismiss / Motion for Summary Judgment

        The District has filed a two-pronged motion to which two different, but related, standards
apply. In reviewing a motion to dismiss a complaint, the Board looks at only the complaint to test its
legal sufficiency. For purposes of reviewing a motion to dismiss, all facts in the complaint are
admitted, and we construe all facts and inferences in favor of the appellant. Super Ct. Civ. R.
12(b)(6); American Ins. Co. v. Smith, 472 A. 2d 872, 874 (D.C. 1984).



       1
         On October 1, 2001, the Receivership ended and authority for the Agency returned to
the District government.
                                                -3-                    Unfoldment, Inc., CAB No. D-1062

        In order to be entitled to summary judgment, the moving party has the burden of showing
that there is no genuine issue of material fact and that it is entitled to judgment as a matter of law.
Super. Ct. Civ. R. 56(c); Clyburn v. 1411 K Street Limited Partnership, 628 A. 2d. 1015, 1017 (D.C.
1993). The record is viewed in the light most favorable to the party opposing the motion. Colbert v.
Georgetown University, 641 A. 2d 469, 472 (D.C. 1994) (en banc). Once the moving party makes
the requisite showing, it becomes incumbent upon the non-moving party to demonstrate that a
genuine disputed factual issue exists. Smith v. Union Labor Life Ins. Co., 620 A.2d 265, 267 (D.C.
1993). The party opposing summary judgment must then make an evidentiary showing, via affidavit
or otherwise, to demonstrate the existence of a genuine issue for trial. The non-moving party must
present definite, competent evidence to rebut the motion. Raskauskas v. Temple Realty Co., 589
A.2d 17, 25 (D.C. 1991). It is not appropriate at this stage of the proceedings to resolve issues of
fact, weigh evidence or make credibility determinations. “The evidence of the non-movant is to be
believed, and all justifiable inferences are to be drawn in his favor.” Anderson v. Liberty Lobby,
Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 255 (1986).

       A. Multi-Year Contract

        Before we analyze Unfoldment’s claim count-by-count, it’s important to clarify the nature of
the contract. Unfoldment maintains that it entered into a multi-year contract with CFSA, and implies
that CFSA was required to exercise options.

        First, Unfoldment claims that the RFP described the contract as a five-year, multi-year
contract, and that it must have been a multi-year contract because the Agency required Unfoldment
to submit cost and pricing data covering a five year period . (Amended Complaint, p.5 ). We are
unable to confirm Appellant’s allegation regarding the RFP since Unfoldment failed to attach a copy
of the RFP as an exhibit to its pleadings. Furthermore, the Agency’s request for the submission of
five years of cost and pricing data was appropriately requested for a one year contract with four one
year options. Unfoldment also argues that this is a multi-year contract because the Article XIX is
entitled Multi-Year Contract Cancellations. Notwithstanding the title of the cancellation clause, the
substance of the clause does not comply with essentials of a multi-year cancellation clause. Article
XIX provides that if the Control Board disapproved the contract or if Congress failed to appropriate
funds, the Contractor would only be paid for work or services actually performed until the contract
was cancelled. On the other hand, Title 27 DCMR § 2001.1 requires that:

       Each multiyear contract shall provide that if the contract is canceled due to
       unavailability of funds, the contractor shall be reimbursed for the reasonable value of
       any nonrecurring costs incurred but not amortized in the price of the supplies
       delivered or services performed under the contract.

This Contract is described as a one year, “Indefinite Quantity Contract with Fixed Unit Pricing.”
(Contract, Articles XIV and XVI). These clauses, as well as, the lack of any cancellation ceiling,
the absence of language regarding the reimbursement for nonrecurring costs, and the statement in
Article XIV § C that there are no cost reimbursable items of any kind in the contract, leads one to
conclude unequivocally that this was not a multi-year contract.
                                                -4-                   Unfoldment, Inc., CAB No. D-1062



        B. Expiration of Option or Termination

       Unfoldment disputes CFSA’s unilateral right to let the Contract expire without exercising the
option. Based on the contract language, CFSA had no limitations on its right to let the Contract
expire. Article XVI, described as the Contract Period, provides:

               1. The term of this contract shall be from July 1 1997, through June
               30, 1998.

               2. The duration of the contract shall be for a period of one year from
               the date of the contract start. The Child and Family Services Agency
               may extend the duration of the contract for a period of one year or
               any portion thereof by written notice to the Contractor before
               expiration of the contract. The exercise of an option is subject to the
               availability of funds at the time of the exercise of the option and the
               approval of the District of Columbia Financial Responsibility and
               Management Assistance Authority (the Control Board).

               3. The total duration of the contract, including the exercise of any
               option(s), shall not exceed five (5) years.

The language is clear. The term of the Contract was for one year subject to the District’s option.
The language is permissive; renewal is uncertain. The Contract placed no limitation on the
government’s freedom to decline the exercise of its option.

        The Contract language which restricts the exercise of an option to the availability of funds
does not compel the government to exercise the option in the event that funds are available. This
clause is inserted into contracts to comply with the federal Anti-Deficiency clause (31 U.S.C. §
1341) and “does not limit the government’s freedom to choose not to exercise the option even if
funds were available.” Tri-Continental Industries, Inc. CAB No. P-297, 39 D.C. Reg. 4456 (Mar. 6,
1992); Government Systems Advisors, Inc. v. U.S., 847 F. 811 (Fed. Cir. 1988).

         The Board is also called to decide whether as a matter of law the Contract expired on its own
terms, or whether the Contract was terminated. The record includes a letter from the then-Receiver,
Ernestine Jones, dated October 28, 1998, notifying Unfoldment that the Agency would not exercise
another option, after a two-month, close-out period. It is not material to this issue that Ms. Jones
letter states that Unfoldment’s services did not meet the needs of the children or mentioned non-
compliance with the District’s tax laws. Even if she were mistaken in these matters, the Agency still
had the right not to renew.

        Appellant directs the Board’s attention to another Agency letter as providing contradictory
evidence to the expiration of the Contract option. Appellant claims that the letter proves that the
District terminated the Contract for default. The undated letter from Milton Grady, the then-Deputy
                                                 -5-                   Unfoldment, Inc., CAB No. D-1062

Receiver for Operations, characterizes the settlement payments made to Unfoldment as arising out of
a termination of Unfoldment=s Contract. He states: “This letter is to advise you of recent
developments pertaining to the review of the costs associated with the termination of Unfoldment’s
contract. (Contract # 7KGC0). This review included consideration of the information forwarded to
my attention on September 27, 2000.” Mr. Grady’s use of the words “termination of Unfoldment’s
contract” does not expand or create legal rights for Unfoldment, beyond those that existed on
December 28, 1998, when the last option expired. Mr. Grady’s letter does not use the words
“termination for convenience” or “default termination,” terms of art in government contracts, but
simply the word “termination” which in standard speech simply means “conclusion.” (Webster’s
Ninth New Collegiate Dictionary, 1985 ed.).

        More significantly, however, Mr. Grady’s letter cannot be used as evidence to prove the
merits of the underlying dispute, because it evidences a settlement agreement. The District law is
consistent with Rule 408 of the Federal Rules of Evidence, which does not permit the use of offers
of compromise or settlement agreements to prove liability for a claim or its amount. See S. Graae &
B. Fitzpatrick, The Law of Evidence in the District of Columbia, Rule 408 (1995 Repl.); Pyne v.
Jamaica Nutrition Holding Ltd., 497 A.2d 1118 (D.C. 1985). Mr. Grady’s undated letter cannot be
used as evidence to prove that Unfoldment’s contract was terminated for cause or convenience.

       C. Specific Counts in the Amended Complaint.

       Count One -- Mitigation of Damages

        Appellant argues that it is entitled to lost rental income, because CFSA has not removed
furniture and client records from Unfoldment=s facilities. Unfoldment claims costs in excess of
$800,000 in this regard. As we have stated above, the Contract does not permit cost reimbursement
of any kind, and accordingly, this Board is not authorized to award such costs. The Contract never
permitted Unfoldment to charge for maintaining these facilities, storing furniture once the contract
option expire or for storage of the client files. Unfoldment is not entitled to lost rental income under
any of its theories of recovery.

        With respect to the case files in Unfoldment=s possession, we direct that CFSA make
arrangements to remove these files from Unfoldment=s property within one month of the date of this
decision. Article XI of the Contract entitled Records states that “All records will revert to the
Receiver after termination of this contract.” The responsibility to move the files does not, however,
entitle Unfoldment to any sums beyond those that it has already received.

       Count Two -- Unpaid Invoices for Services Rendered

        Unfoldment acknowledges that CFSA paid it $201,825.58 for outstanding invoices. It claims
that the total amount of the invoices was $275,404.23, and further that due to CFSA’s delay in
payment that it has incurred damages and lost income in an undetermined amount in excess of
$100,000. Unfoldment is not entitled to any damages or lost income for CFSA’s delayed payment.
CFSA states that it was able to verify less than half of the amount Unfoldment claimed. CFSA paid
                                                -6-                    Unfoldment, Inc., CAB No. D-1062

Unfoldment $201,825.58 for actual invoices. The District claims that CFSA paid Unfoldment for
more than it was entitled to. This unadorned statement of the District’s is not sufficient to establish
the lack of a disputed fact.

        With respect to Unfoldment’s claim that it is still owed for outstanding invoices, we deny
the District’s motion for summary judgment. We, however, order Unfoldment to present within 30
days a detailed accounting of what invoices remain unpaid.

        Unfoldment also seeks payment for 60% of its available bed space over the 17-month
contract period thereby establishing a minimum usage. The contract had no minimum, only a
maximum, and the contract only permits payment for the actual number of youth who were placed in
Unfoldment’s facilities. Accordingly, we grant the District’s motion to dismiss Unfoldment’s claim
for “adjusted invoices.”

       Count Three -- Close Out Costs

        Unfoldment claims that it is entitled to a yet undetermined amount in excess of $100,000 for
“close out costs” from October 28 to December 28, 1998. This period corresponds to the 60-day
close out period permitted by the General Receiver. In its Opposition, Unfoldment lists close out
costs to be among other things lease costs, unexpired leases on automobiles for the program,
severance pay, health care benefits, moving and storage costs, legal and administrative costs. None
of these costs is recoverable under this Contract. We therefore grant the District’s motion for
summary judgment for Unfoldment’s claim for closing costs.

       Count Four -- Contract Termination Costs

        The Board has ruled that the contract expired under its own terms, and Appellant is not
entitled to any termination costs including initial costs, proposal preparation costs, lost profits and
other fees and costs. We therefore grant the District’s motion for summary judgment.

       Count Five -- Interest Payments

        Unfoldment alleges that it is due Quick Payment Act interest and simple interest on late paid
invoices. The District challenges Unfoldment’s entitlement to any QPA interest because it argues
there was a dispute over the amount owed, and it disputes Unfoldment’s entitlement to simple
interest because it argues that Unfoldment has been paid for all of its work under the Contract. The
District has not demonstrated it’s entitlement to judgment as a matter of law and accordingly, we
deny its motion for summary judgment with respect to interest payments. We are, however,
interested in seeing Unfoldment present within 30 days, a detailed formulation of its claim for QPA
including a list of invoices, dates of submission, dates of payment and a calculation of interest due.
                                               -7-                    Unfoldment, Inc., CAB No. D-1062



       Count Six -- Refusal to Pay Settlement Costs

        Unfoldment alleges that CFSA’s refusal to settle Unfoldment’s claims and pay settlement
costs in a timely manner has caused Unfoldment damages. This is not a claim cognizable under the
PPA. This count is dismissed.

       Count Seven -- Bad faith and Material Breach of Contract

       Unfoldment alleges a multitude of failures by CFSA which it characterizes as bad faith and
material breaches. These claims are irrelevant to what is material in this case and the bad faith and
material breach of contract claims are dismissed.

       Count Eight -- Defamation and Reputation-Plus Claim

       This is not a claim cognizable under the PPA. The defamation and reputation-plus claim is
therefore dismissed.

       Count Nine -- Interference with Unfoldment’s Contract

        These facts are irrelevant to the issues that are cognizable by this Board. Therefore, this
claim is dismissed.

       Count Ten – Attorney’s fees

       Neither the PPA nor the Contract permits the payment of attorney’s fees and costs of
settlement in the expiration of an option. This claim is therefore dismissed.

       D. Disqualification of Counsel

       There is one remaining matter which the Board must address and that is the status of
Unfoldment’s counsel in this matter. The District has requested that the Board disqualify Ms. Reed
from representing Unfoldment, because she would most certainly be called as a witness in this
matter. Rule 3.7 of the District of Columbia Rules of Professional Conduct provides, in pertinent
part:

       (A) A lawyer shall not act as advocate at a trial in which the lawyer is likely to be a
       necessary witness except where:

       (1) The testimony relates to an uncontested issue;
       (2) The testimony relates to the nature and value of legal services rendered in the
       case; or
       (3) Disqualification of the lawyer would work substantial hardship on the client.
                                                -8-                   Unfoldment, Inc., CAB No. D-1062

       The Board finds that exceptions (1) and (2) do not apply to Ms. Reed, and because she has a
co-counsel in this matter we find that her disqualification will not work a substantial hardship on
Unfoldment. Accordingly, we disqualify Ms. Reed as an attorney in this matter.

       E. Further Proceedings

         The Board has ruled that Unfoldment has the right to pursue its claim for unpaid invoices and
for interest. The Board has given Unfoldment 30 days to present a detailed claim of unpaid invoices,
demonstrating what it has not been paid for, and 30 days to develop its QPA and simple interest
claim. No other claims which Unfoldment has presented hold any merit.

       SO ORDERED.


DATE: March 20, 2002                                  /s/ Lorilyn E. Simkins
                                                      LORILYN E. SIMKINS
                                                      Chief Administrative Judge


CONCURRING:


/s/ Matthew S. Watson
MATTHEW S. WATSON
Administrative Judge
