                     GOVERNMENT OF THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA
                     CONTRACT OF APPEALS BOARD
APPEAL OF:

       PRINCE CONSTRUCTION COMPANY, INC.                         )
                                                                 )   CAB No. D-1011
       Under Contract Nos. 93-0037-AA-2-0-KA                     )   (Quick Payment Act)
                           94-0065-AA-2-0-CC                     )


       For the Appellant: Robert Klimek, Esq., Klimek, Kolodney & Casale, P.C. For
the Government: Jack Simmons, III, Esq., Assistant Corporation Counsel.

       Opinion by Administrative Judge Matthew S. Watson with Chief Administrative
Judge Jonathan D. Zischkau, concurring.


                                        OPINION
                                 (Courtlink Filing ID 2668212)


       This is the second request for reconsideration of this matter. In an opinion dated
February 25, 2002, the Board granted summary judgment for quick payment act interest
to Appellant. (50 D.C. Reg. 7400). Upon motion of the District to reconsider that
judgment, the Board vacated its judgment and dismissed the action. (July, 15, 2003, 50
D.C. Reg. 7518). The matter is now before the Board on the motion of the Appellant to
reconsider the dismissal. Upon consideration of the instant motion and the response of
the District, the Board finds no basis to reconsider the dismissal. The Appellant’s Motion
for Reconsideration is denied.

                                   BACKGROUND

        As noted in the Board’s July 15, 2003 opinion, (Id.), in addition to the instant
action, claims involving the contracts now before the Board were previously heard by the
Superior Court. The Superior Court action was concluded by a consent judgment. As
opposed to a voluntary dismissal in which the court makes no determination as to facts, in
a consent judgment, just as in any other judgment, the court makes an affirmative
determination of the facts and law in the case. The judgment of the court, including a
consent judgment, establishes the facts, and may be enforced in its own right without
further proof of the underlying cause. The Board, pursuant to the “law of the case”
doctrine, is required to give deference to the Superior Court’s determinations.

       The Court of Appeals recently discussed the “law of the case” doctrine stating:

       "The 'law of the case' doctrine bars a trial court from reconsidering the
       same question of law that was presented to and decided by another [judge]
       of coordinate jurisdiction . . . ." Tompkins v. Washington Hospital Center,
       433 A.2d 1093, 1098 (D.C. 1981). "The analysis focuses on whether the
       question initially decided is substantially the same as the issue being
       presented and whether the court's first ruling was deemed to be final."
       Gordon v. Raven Systems & Research, Inc., 462 A.2d 10, 12 (D.C. 1983)
       (citing Tompkins). The doctrine applies "when (1) the motion under
       consideration is substantially similar to the one already raised before, and
       considered by, the first court; (2) the first court's ruling is sufficiently
       final; and (3) the prior ruling is not clearly erroneous in light of newly
       presented facts or a change in substantive law." P.P.P. Productions, Inc. v.
       W & L, Inc., 418 A.2d 151, 152 (D.C. 1980) (citation and internal
       quotation marks omitted).

Pannell v. District of Columbia, 829 A.2d 474, 477-8 (D.C. 2003).

        Appellant supports the instant motion for reconsideration by a recitation of facts
supporting its position that the payment made in settlement of the Superior Court action
was payment of a contract claim and not an equitable claim of unjust enrichment. The
facts now alleged by appellant were all available at the time the Superior Court entered
its judgment. We found in our previous order dismissing the matter that the joint
memorandum in support of the consent judgment which was adopted in the court’s final
judgment clearly based the award on equitable, rather than contract grounds. This is the
same question of law as is now before the Board. Regardless of whether the Board might
itself come to a different opinion as to whether the payments were contractual or
equitable, the determination adopted by the Superior Court is not clearly erroneous. The
Board may not relitigate a factual matter already adopted by the parties and reduced to a
consent judgment of the Superior Court. The Board is therefore bound to follow the
Superior Court determination in this matter that the payment was based on equity, not
contract. Interest is not authorized on an equitable payment. Appellant’s Motion for
Reconsideration must therefore be denied.

       SO ORDERED


November 7, 2003                                          /s/ Matthew S. Watson
                                                    MATTHEW S. WATSON
                                                    Administrative Judge

CONCURRING:


       /s/ Jonathan D. Zischkau
JONATHAN D. ZISCHKAU
Chief Administrative Judge
