                       GOVERNMENT OF THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA
                             CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD


APPEAL OF:

        AMERICAN FLAG CONSTRUCTION, INC.                           )
                                                                   ) CAB No. D-1135
        Under Contract No. 91-0037-AA-2-0-LA                       )

      For the Appellant: Charles R. Jones, Esq., Jenkins & Jones. For the District of Columbia:
Mark D. Back, Esq., Section Chief and Assistant Corporation Counsel.

       Opinion by Administrative Judge Jonathan D. Zischkau, with Administrative Judge Matthew
S. Watson, concurring.

                                                OPINION
                                         CourtLink Filing ID 822334

        Appellant American Flag Construction, Inc., had a contract with the District of Columbia to
provide moving and hauling services to District agencies. After exercising the contract’s first option
which extended the contract for an additional year, the District allowed the contract to expire at the
end of the first option year. The District did not exercise the option for the second year because the
Appellant failed timely to correct certain tax deficiencies. Appellant filed a claim with the
contracting officer seeking $1,822,917.50 in damages and an order compelling the District to
exercise the second year option. When the contracting officer denied the claim, Appellant filed its
appeal here, arguing that the Appellant should have been awarded the second option year or an
equivalent contract. The District has moved to dismiss for failure to state a claim or, in the
alternative, for summary judgment. Because we conclude that the contracting officer had no
obligation to exercise the second year option, the District is entitled to prevail on summary
judgment.

                                            BACKGROUND

         The relevant facts are not in dispute. In July 1998, the District awarded the Appellant a
contract to provide moving and hauling services. (Appeal File (“AF”) Ex. 2). The contract was for one
year, with the District having the option to extend the contract for three one-year option periods. (Id.).
The District exercised the first option in July 1999, extending the contract for an additional year. (AF
Ex. 4). By letter of May 31, 2000, the contracting officer notified Appellant that it intended to exercise
the contract for a second option year. (Statement of Controversy, Appellant’s Ex. 1). The District
letter states that “[t]his preliminary notice does not obligate the District to actually exercise the option.”
(Id.). Also on May 31, the District’s Office of Contracting and Procurement faxed to Appellant a tax
certification affidavit that was to be completed and signed by Appellant and returned promptly to OCP
to allow the Department of Employment Services and the Office of Finance and Revenue to determine
whether Appellant had complied with its tax obligations. (AF Ex. 1; Appellant’s Ex. 4). This was part
of the contracting officer’s effort to determine Appellant’s present responsibility. Appellant did not
respond. On June 12, 2000, OCP again faxed the tax certification affidavit to Appellant, stating on the
                                                  -2-         American Flag Construction, Inc., CAB No. D-1135



fax cover page:

        SEVERAL ATTEMPTS [HAVE] BEEN MADE TO RECEIVE THE TAX
        CERTIFICATION AFFIDAVIT FROM YOU, BUT TO NO AVAIL. Your tax
        certification affidavit is required to be evaluated . . . to determine whether your
        company is in compliance or not. There is not enough time, the contract expires 7-10-
        00. Please fill out the tax certification upon receiving and return ASAP for the Moving
        and Services Contract . . . [n]o later than the close of business today.

(AF Ex. 1). Appellant returned the completed affidavit to OCP the same day.

        On June 14, 2000, the contracting officer learned from the Department of Employment Services
that Appellant was not in compliance with the District’s tax filing and payment requirements. (AF Ex.
2). By letter of June 14, the contracting officer notified Appellant of its noncompliance with the tax
requirements and directed Appellant “to take measures immediately by June 21, 2000 to correct the
noncompliance issues cited in the DOES verification document that is enclosed.” (AF Ex. 2). On June
29, 2000, OCP learned from the Office of Tax and Revenue that Appellant still was not in compliance
with the tax filing and payment requirements of District tax laws. (AF Ex. 3). OCP faxed the
noncompliance notice to Appellant the same day. (Id.). On June 30, 2000, the contracting officer
informed the Appellant that it still did not comply with District tax laws. The contracting officer
further warned Appellant that its contract would expire on July 10, 2000, if the Appellant failed to
either correct the tax deficiency within 5 days or furnished an acceptable explanation for its failure to
correct the tax deficiency. (AF Exs. 4, 6; Appellant’s Ex. 2).

        In a letter of July 5, 2000, Appellant explained that when it had filed its tax returns it was not
able to pay the outstanding tax at that time. Appellant’s vice president states in the letter:

        I have made several attempts to contact the Office of [Finance and Revenue] and Dept.
        of Employment Services to make arrangement for payment. I have left several
        messages and have yet to receive a return call. I am prepared to make payment today if
        I can reach someone. Please give me a chance to clear this matter.

(Appellant’s Memorandum in Opposition, Ex. 1). In an affidavit, Appellant’s vice president states that
she paid the Office of Finance and Revenue all but $300 of its tax liability on July 5, 2000, with the
remaining amount being paid on July 11, 2000. (Id., Ex. 2). The vice president says further that she
contacted personnel at the Department of Employment Services on July 5, 2000, but the officials who
could finalize the compliance papers were on vacation. Appellant did not correct the tax deficiency
and did not come into tax compliance until after July 10, 2000. (Id., Ex. 2; Appellant’s Statement of
Controversy ¶ 5).

        The District allowed the contract to expire on July 10, 2000. (Id.; Complaint ¶ 5).

        The Appellant filed a claim with the contracting officer seeking $1,822,917.50 and exercise of
the second year option. The contracting officer denied this claim and the Appellant appealed here,
arguing that the District should have exercised the second year option or entered into an equivalent
                                                  -3-         American Flag Construction, Inc., CAB No. D-1135



contract with Appellant. The District has moved to dismiss for failure to state a claim or, in the
alternative, for summary judgment.

                                            DISCUSSION

        We exercise jurisdiction over this appeal pursuant to D.C. Code § 2-309.03(a)(2).

        To be entitled to summary judgment, the District must show that there is no genuine issue of
material fact and that it is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Colbert v. Georgetown University,
641 A.2d 469, 472 (D.C. 1994) (en banc); Willis v. Cheek, 387 A.2d 716, 719 (D.C. 1978). The record
is viewed in the light most favorable to the party opposing summary judgment. Colbert v. Georgetown
University, 641 A.2d at 472.

         The key issue in this case is whether the District’s contracting officer was legally obligated to
exercise the second year option. Appellant argues that because the District employees who prepare tax
compliance certifications were on vacation during the period from July 5-10, 2000, Appellant has
demonstrated sufficient cause for its failure to correct its tax deficiency. Appellant concludes that the
District improperly failed to exercise the second year option. The District argues that a contract option
is a unilateral right that it may or may not exercise in its discretion. We conclude that the District had
discretion in deciding whether to exercise the second year option and that it did not abuse its discretion
by failing to exercise the option.

        The pertinent portion of the contract states the following with regard to the option periods:
“The District may extend the term of the contract for three (3) one (1) year option periods or any
portion thereof by written notice to the Contractor before expiration of the contract.” (AF Ex. 2, at 19).
 The phrase “may extend” indicates that exercise of the option is at the government’s discretion. The
District’s procurement regulations define an option as “a unilateral right in a contract under which, for
a specified time, the District may elect to purchase additional quantities or services called for by the
contract, or may elect to extend the term of the contract.” 27 DCMR § 2099.1. It is well-settled that
for the type of option involved in the present contract the government has discretion in deciding
whether to exercise the option, even when the government has provided the contractor preliminary
notice of its intent to exercise the option. Good Food Services, Inc., CAB No. P-0494, July 8, 1997, 44
D.C. Reg. 6846, 6847-48 (decision not to exercise an option contract is within an agency’s discretion);
Government Systems Advisors, Inc. v. United States, 847 F.2d 811, 813 (Fed. Cir. 1988).

        The contracting officer did not abuse her discretion in declining to exercise the second year
option. The undisputed facts show that the contracting officer repeatedly advised the Appellant to
correct its tax deficiencies so that it could be found responsible. Despite the warnings, the Appellant
did not timely correct its tax deficiencies. We can find no fault in the contracting officer’s decision
not to exercise an option when the contractor failed to demonstrate its present responsibility. Even
viewing the record in a light most favorable to the Appellant, there is simply no basis for the
assertion that the District was responsible for Appellant’s delay in resolving its tax deficiency.

       Finally, we reject Appellant’s argument that the District had to exercise the option because
Appellant provided an adequate explanation for failing to correct its tax deficiency. Even if we
                                                  -4-         American Flag Construction, Inc., CAB No. D-1135



could conclude as a matter of law that Appellant provided an adequate explanation (the record does
not support such a conclusion), its argument would still fail. Where all preconditions have been met
for the government to exercise an option, the government still is not legally obligated to exercise the
option. In Government Systems Advisory, Inc. v. United States, the contract provided that the
government could extend performance only if appropriated funds were available. The contractor
argued that the government had to exercise the option because appropriated funds were available.
The Federal Circuit affirmed the trial court’s ruling on summary judgment against the contractor,
holding that such a contractual stipulation serves as a passive exculpatory provision available to the
government, not one that obligates the government to exercise the option. 847 F.2d at 813. In the
present case, when the District requested the contractor to comply with the responsibility conditions,
the District did not thereby obligate itself to exercise the option if the contractor complied with those
conditions.

                                           CONCLUSION

       Because we conclude, as a matter of law, that the contracting officer had no legal obligation
to exercise the second year option, the District is entitled to prevail on summary judgment. The
appeal is denied.

        SO ORDERED.

DATED: July 25, 2002                                    /s/ Jonathan D. Zischkau
                                                        JONATHAN D. ZISCHKAU
                                                        Administrative Judge



CONCURRING:


/s/ Matthew S. Watson
MATTHEW S. WATSON
Administrative Judge
