                       •
                  GOVERNMENT OF THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA
                                                                           •
                        CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD
                               717 Un! STREET. N.W .• SUITE 4JO
                                  WASHINGTON. D.C. 20005
                                       (101) 717-6.','>7 (orc #)
                                        (1112) 717 __1')')3 (FlU fl.)


                                                 ***
                                       February 7, 2000




TO:           Richard L. Moorehouse, Esq.
              Reed Smith Shaw & McClay, LLP
              1301 K Street, NW
              Suite 1100 - East Tower
              Washington, DC 20005-3317




              Thomas 1. Foltz, Esq.
              Assistant Corporation Counsel
              441 4th Street, N.W., 6th Floor
              Washington, DC 20001


SUBJECT:      CAB No. D-IIOO (Appeal Of: Second Genesis. Inc.)

       Attached is a copy of the Board's Opinion Granting the District's Motion to Dismiss and
Dismissing Appellant's Complaints for lack of jurisdiction .

                                              .......




                                                              Secretary to the Bo'ar~t
                               •
                           GOVERNMENT OF THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA
                                                                              •                                      [7843]


                                 CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD

     APPEAL OF:

     SECOND GENESIS, INC.                                                )
                                                                         )       CAB No. D-I 100
                                                   1
            Under Contract No. HC/ AD 9811                               )

            For the Appellant, Second Genesis, Inc., Richard L. Moorhouse, Esq. and David P. Hickey,
     Esq., Reed, Smith, Shaw & McClay, LLP. For the Government, Thomas .J. Foltz, Esq., Assistant
     Corporation Counsel.

            Opinion by Administrativc Judgc Matthcw S. Watson, with ChicI' Administrative Judgc
     Lorilyn E. Simkins and Administrative Judge Jonathan D. Zischkau, concurring.
'.
                                              OPINION AND ORDER

             This appeal presents a claim fur payment or $528,626.68 fur breach or contract, or, in the
     alternative, fur compensation for costs incurred in good raith and innocent reliance on a contract later
     determined to be void. The District or Columbia filed a motion to dismiss the appeal ror lack or
     jurisdiction, or, if within the jurisdiction ofthe Board, for failure to state a claim upon which relier
     can be granted. We dismiss the appeal for lack of subject matter jurisdiction.

                                                  BA.CKGROUND}

             On February 7, 1997, the District or Columbia Dcpartment or Iluman Services ("OilS")
     issued Solicitation No. JA-SC-DII-7004 7-01 (lithe Sol icitation" or "RFP") ror rcsidcntial substance



             1 The appeal is styled under contract number IIC/ AD 9811. That number is the contract number
     assigned to a contract with RAP, Inc. which resilIted rrom the same solicitation. Appeal File ("AF") Tab 8.
     The appellant alleges a contract with a number related to the solicitation number, .IA-A('-DII-7004 7-0 I. (AF
     Tab 7).

              2 In construing rules or practice, the Boai'd is guided by precedent orthe District of Columbia courts.
     l30ard Rule 100.6. When a motion ror dismissal based on lack or subject matter jurisd ict ion asserts thaI the
     lack orjurisdiction is apparent on the race oFthe complaint, the Superior Court treats the motion in the same
     manner as a motion riled under the rule governing motions ror dismissal based on r:1ilure to state a cause or
     action. Maffhews 1'. Autol/lated Systems (/1/(/ Servir;es. Inc, 558 A.2d 1175, 1 179 (D.C. 1989). The District
     does not, at this time, contest the allegations or the complaint. Motioll to Dismiss at 4. "In considering a
     motion to dismiss a complaint ror failure t(Ystate a claim, this court shall construe the racts on the face orlhe
     complaint in the light 1110st ravorable to the non-moving party, and accept as true the allegations il) the
     complaint." Fred Ezra Co. 1'. Pedas, 682 A.2d 173, 174 (D.C. 1996). For purposes or determining these
     1110tions, the l30ard has accepted as true the allegations of the complaint, and the contents or doculllents
     rererred to in the complaint and included in the Appeal File ("AF") by both parties. See l3ih/e /llay ('!llIrch
     1'. Beard,', 680 A.2d 419, 434 rn4 (D.C. 1996).
                              •                        -2-
                                                                          •    SFU)NJ)(;hN/',,)'/,)',/!I'(' C/\IlNoU-ll00
                                                                                                                            [7844]




     addiction treatment services. The Solicitation, prepared on a standard District of Columbia
     "Solicitation, Offer and Award" form con~aining, with continuations, 87 pages, requested oflCrs to
     provide the District with I to 27 (minimum/maximum) "slots" 10r adult short-term care; 1 to 77 slots
     for adult intermediate term care; and 1 to 2~' slots for youth short-term intermediate care. (AF Tab
     12).

     The RFP provided, in part:

                     The undersigned offers and agrees that, with respect to all terms and conditions
                     accepted by the District under "A WARD" below, this offer and the provisions ofthc
                     RFP/IFB will constitute a formal contract.

     (Id. at I).
••                                                   ***
                     The Department of Health reserves the right to inspect all facilities prior to execution
                     of the contract or placement of clients ....

     (Id, Section C.7.2 at 22).
                                                      ***
                     INSPECTION OF r ACILITIES BEFORE AWARD

                     Prior to award of any contract for these services, the District will inspcct the offeror's
                     facility(ies) it intends to provide in-patient substance addiction treatment services to
                     adults and youths, in order to substantiatc the olTeror's ability to provide the services
                     required in Sections C and II.

     (ld, Section E.l.I at 28).
                                                       ***
                     The term orthe contract shall be for the period oronc (I) year from the date ofawnrd
                     as specified on page one (1) ofthe contract, subject to the District's option to extend
                     the term of this contract.

     (Id., Section F.I at 29).
                                                       ***
                      PRE-A WARD APPROVAL

                      Authority Approval: In accordance with the regulations adopted pursuant to the
                      District of Columbia rinancial Responsibility and Management Assistance Act or
                      1995, P.L. 104-8, before the District may award the contract, the District of
                      Columbia Financial Responsibility and Manngemcnt Assistance Authority must
                      approve the contract.

      (Id., Section 1.21.1 at 56).
                         •                       -3-
                                                                     •    SHUN/) (i/':NI'.\I,\, IN!' C;\1l No IJ-IIIIII
                                                                                                                          [7845]




         In response to the Solicitation, Second Genesis, Inc. ("Appellant" or "Second Genesis")
subl1litted a fully compliant and responsive initial proposal on March 14, 1997. Negotiations
proceeded through June 1997. (Complaint ~3).

      On July 10, 1997, Second Genesis submitted its fully compliant best and final ofTer
("BAFO"). On August 5, 1997, Second Cienesis submitted an additional explanation of its July 10
BAFO. (Complaint '16).

       On August 12, 1997, the District orally advised Second Genesis that it had been selected for
award ofa contract for a portion of the services originally solicited and asked Second Gcnesis to sign
proposed contract doculllcnts. That same day, in the presence of District contracting officials, the
Deputy Exccutive Dircctor of Second (Jencsis signcd the proposed contract which had bccn prcparcd
by the District. (Complaint '17). The documcnt executed by Sccond Gencsis difrcrcd in form.
although not in substance, frol11 the Solicitation and Sccond Gcncsis' BAFO. The District officials
who were present did not sign thc document. (AI" Tab 7).

        The proposed contract signed by Second Genesis provided in part:

                                                 ***
                        (Contractor shallllt)t commencc pcrfc.Hllwncc until the
                        District has signed this document)

(lei. at I immediately above spacc for contractor's signature).


                                                ***
                        Period of Contract:
                          Frol11 Datc of Award
                             To 12 Months Therealler

(lei. at I in lower right-hand corner).

                                                ***
                        ARTICLE 4 - TERM OF CONTRACT

                        The term or thc contract shall be Iqor the period of OIlC ( I) year from date
                        [01'1 award as specified 011 page one (I) orthe contract subject to thc District's
                        option to extcnd thc term of this contract.

(ld. at 2).
                             •                         -4-
                                                                           •    S!TONI> li!oN!:S!S, !N(' C Afl No D·lIOO
                                                                                                                           [7846]




                                                     ***
                            ARTICLE 7 - PRE-A WARD APPROV AL

                            Authority Approval - In accordance with the regulations adopted pursuant to
                            the District of Ct)lumbia Financial Responsibility and Management
                            Assistance Act of 1995, P.L. 104-8, before the District may award the
                            contract, the District of Columbia Financial Responsibility and Management
                            Assistance Authority must approve the contract.

    (ld at 4).

            In reliance upon the District's oral noti lication that it had won the awmd. corroborated by the
    proposed contract presented to it for signature. Second Genesis proceeded, with the knowledge of
"   the District, to mobilize its personnel and resources to perform the contract which it anticipated
    would be finalized. (Complaint "'18 and 10). On August 27, 1997, Drs. Jasper. Ormand and Roach,
    representing the DBS Addiction Prevention and Recovery Administration, conducted an inspection
    tour ofthe Second Genesis facility in order to insure that Second Genesis was prepared to commence
    performance. During the tour, various details were linalized in anticipation of implementing the
    contract, including specific discussions of admission procedures, referrals and treatment programs.
    The agency officials conducting the inspection orally advised Second Genesis that the District
    expected to begin to utilize the beds within a number of weeks. (Complaint ']11). Second Genesis
    held staff and facilities available for the immediate use of the District at a cost claimed to be in excess
    of haifa million dollars. (Complaint '19). No beds were ever utilized. (Amended Complaint '11 I (b)),

             The District retained the proposed contract signed by Second Genesis, but no District onicial
    signed it. On November 25, 1997, apparently atthc request or the District, Second Genesis confirmed
    its "intent to honor the pricing set forth in our technical and price proposals submitted in response
    to the District's Solicitation .... " (AI" 13). On January 2, 199X, almost II 1110nths aller the Solicitation
    was issued, and nearly five months after execution by Second Gencsis or the proposed contract
    docllments, the District submitted the proposed contract to the Council orthe District ofColulllbia ("City
    Council") and the Financial Responsibility and Management Assistance Authority ("Colltrol Board'")
    for their respective approvals. (AI" 13). The City Council took no action on the request. By operation
    of law, the contract was deemed to have been app'rovcd by the City Council.lanuary 15. IlJ9X. (Id.: D.C.
    Code §1-1130(b)(2)(A»).

            Aller its receipt of the request for approval, the Control Board, without approving the proposed
    contract, requested further inlormation. (Appellant's Oppositioll olld RejJ~)l to ,)'lIjJP Ie 111 ell t to
    Appellee's Motion to Dismiss, Tab A). The District did not provide the inrormation requested.
    Instead, on February 18, 1998, the Distdct advised Second Genesis that it was reopening the
    procurement (Complaint ~13), effectively withdrawing the proposed contract from the Control Board.
    On March 5, 1998, the District issued a "Second Amendment" to the Solicitation clarifying certain
    terms. Second Genesis participated in the reopened negotiations submitting a new BAFO on April 10,
    1998. (Complaint ~ 18). Second Genesi'$ continued to incur costs and on several occasions thereafter
    extended its most recent offer. (Complaint '\19). The District also opened negotiations with RAP, Inc.
                              •                         -5-
                                                                             •    Sh( (1/1'1' (;;',;W,\/,\ IX(   ('!Ill No IJ-IIOO
                                                                                                                                     [7847]




    At the conclusion ufthe reopened negotiations, RAP was selccled for award. ()n I )ccelllber 15. IlJ9R.
    the District submitted a proposed contract with RAP for approval by the City Council and Control
    Board. The City COllncil took no action, causing the contract to be deemed approved Dect;mber 25.
    1998. (AF Tab 6). The Control Board approved the contract January 28.1999. (AF Tab 5). The
    proposed contract was executed by RAP on February 2, 1999. and accepted by the District on
    February 3, 1999. (AF Tab 8).

                                                  DISCUSSION

            The Second Gencsis complaint includes four counts: COllnt I. Breach o!'Contract: Count II.
    Equitable Estoppel: Count III. Breach ofContraet - Improper Failure to Terminate for Convenience:
    and Count IV, Good Faith ,1I111 Subst,lIltial Compliance. Second (;encsis contends that the District
    entered into a valid contract with it, or, due to the District's course or conduct. that the District is
"   equitably estopped to deny that it entered into a valid contract. In the alternative, Second Genesis
    contends that it is entitled to be compensated ror costs actually incurred based on its innocent
    reliance on a void contract with the District. The District seeks dismissal or the complaint on the
    basis that the Board lacks subject matter jurisdiction because no contract ever existed, or, in the
    alternative, that the complaint rails to state a claim upon which relief can be granted ror the same
    reason. that is, if no contract existed. no contract can have been breached.

    I. .Jurisdiction of the Board is hased upon contract

             Jurisdiction or the Board over appeals is established by the Procurement Practices Act or
     IlJR5. as amended ("PI' A"). codified at D.C. Code ~ I-II RIel. seq. The PP A empowers the Buard
    to hear "[alny appeal by a contractor rrom a Iinal decision by the contracting or!icer Oil a claim by
    a contractor, when such claim arises under or relates to a contract." D.C. Code ~ I-II RlJ.3(a)(2).
    Thus. the Board's authority is predicated on the existence or a contract. For this Board to have
    jurisdiction over an appeal. the appellant must he a "contractuI''' and the claim lllust be one which
    "arises under or relates to a contract." Absent a contractual relationship. the Board is without
    jurisdiction to act. l The Board hasjurisdiction to consider disputes arising out or express contracts
    and implied-in-ract contracts. see Roherl K. Adall/s. AS\3( 'A No. 34519. W)-2 BCA '1 21 J)l)lJ at
     I 09.()94. as well as contracts entered into. but later det~rll1ined to be void pursl1<lnt to D.C. Code ~ I-
     II R2.5(d). 5,'JV Imaging. JIIC .• CAB No. D-RO(), .Jan. 2]. 1992,39 D.C. Reg. 4393. 43lJR.

           The initial question to be determined is whether at any time a contract came into cxistence
    between Second Genesis and the District. Absent a contract. we have noiurisdiction to consider this
    appeal. We conclude that the parties never entered into a contract.




             1 The PI' A is based on the Federal Contract Disputes Act       or197R. 41 II.S.C. ~~ ()O I. t'f. sec/-
    .lurisdiction of rederal boards has similarly be,en held to be limited to matters based on "valid contractual
    theory." Paragoll Energy Corp. 11. Us., 645 r;.2d 966. 975, 227 Ct.CI. 176 (1981),
                                •                           -()-
                                                                                 •                                      [7848]




     II. A written contnlct is rcqui"cd hy law

            Effective April 12, 1997. after the extended date ror submission or proposals (lVlarch 17,
     1997). but prior to completion ofthe IIrst negotiations with Second Genesis (August 12. 1(97). the
     City Council adopted legislation requiring that all District government contracts be in writing. D.C.
     Code § 1-1181.5 provides:

                     (d)( I) No District employee subject to this chapter shall authorize payment 1'01' the
            va lue or goods and services received without a val id written contract. Th is subsect ion sha II
            not apply to a payment required by court order or a rinal decision or the Contract Appeals
            Board.

                    (2) After April 12, 1997, no District employee shall enter into an oral agreement
.•          with a vemlor to provide gomls or services to the District government without a va Iid written
            contract. Any violation of this paragrapll shall he cause f()r termination or employment or
            the District employee.

                      (3) Any vendor who, aner April 12. 1997, enters illto an oral agrecment with a
            District employee to provide goods or services to the District government without a valid
            written contract shall not be paid. If the oral agreel1lent was entered into by a District
            employee at the direction of a supervisor, the supervisor shall be terl1linated. The Mayor
            shall submit a report to the Council at least 4 til1les a year on the nUl1lber or persons cited
            or terl1linated under this provision.

             The statutory policy could not be clearer. Aller April 12. 1997, no District cmployec has
     authority to enter into a contract other than in writing. To add cmphasis. the Council scparately
     provided that no employee shall make paymcnt on a contract not in writing. and. secmingly
     redundantly. but certainly emphasizing the point. provided that 110 vendor shall be paid without a
     written contract. Further, violation orthis provisionlllny bc cause f'or termination of'the employee
     making an oral contract. and, if' made at the direction of' a supcrvisor. thc supervisor "shall be
     terminated." We cannot take this il~iunction of'the Council lightly. See !)iffs Mo(orllo(cl. CA\3
     No. I)-I OOX. Aug 13. 1999. 4() D.C. Reg. X()S3.

     III. Thc,'c is no wl"ittcn contract

            The requirement that District governlllent contracts be in wrttlng is an <lpplic<ltion to
     government contracts of the so-called "statute of Ij'auds" doctrine which is applicable to cOl1lmercial
     contracts. 4 Pursuant to this doctrine. a writing which is not signed hy the party chargcd. is not a


             4   5;ee, for example: D.C. Code &28:2-20 I Formal requirements; statute of frauds

                       (I) Except as otherwise provided in this section a cuntract 1'01' the sale orgoods 1'01' the price
                       01'$500 or lIlore is not enforceable by way of action or defense unless there is some writing
                       sufficient to indicate that a contract 1'01' sale has been lIlade het\\'een the parties ami signed
                       by the party against wholll enforcement is sought or by his authorized agent or broker. A
                       writing is not insufficient becau'se it omits or incorrectly states a term agreed upon hut the
                       contract is not enrorceable under this paragraph beyond the quantity orgoods shown in such
                       writing.
                               •                       , -7-
                                                       , .
                                                                             •    Sf:'( ONIJ lihNI:.'iIS, 1,\'(' Ct\B No. 1J-11 UU
                                                                                                                                     [7849]




     "written contract" since a contract is not complete and binding until it is signed by both parties.
     Braun v. YqfTee, 193 A.2d 895, 896 (D_C. 1963).

             The need to complete a contract by signatures of both parties is particularly critical in the
     context of government contracts practice which utilizes multipurpose documents. The government
     typically relies on standard forms which are prepared once, but have changing functions at different
     stages of the procurement cycle as blank spaces are completed and signatures are added.

             The instant Solicitation was prepared on a standard "Solicitation, Offer and Award" form.
     That form, together with a description of the needs or the government, is intended to be issued by
     the District as a request for proposals to interested suppliers_ The same form is to be completed and
     executed and returned to the District as an olTer by potential contractors. Several potential
     contractors may present offers. The completed form remains an offer until "accepted by the District
.,   ... ," at which time, by its own terms, "the provisions of the RFP/IFB will constitute a Formal
     Contract. "

             Appellant's initial of Tel' was submitted on the original Solicitation, OfTel' and Award form.
     Atter negotiation and submission of a BAFO, the terms, as negotiated, were entered by the District
     on a standard form "Contract for Goods and/or Services." That form, although prepared by the
     District, is intended to be first signed by the contractor as a Iinal olTer, and then accepted by the
     District. Directly above the space for the contractor's signature is the warning "Contractor shall not
     commence performance unti Ithe District has signed this document." The block I()r execution by the
     District is titled "Acceptance by the District."

             Reading the allegations orthe Complaint most favorably to the Appellant, there is a written
     memorandum of a contract which is signed by the Appellant only. The Solicitation was issucd
     February 7, J 997. Proposals were received March 17, 1997. Second Genesis submitted a fully
     responsive proposal to the Solicitation. Negotiations continucd through August 5. 1997. Sccond
     Genesis was selected f(Jr award by the Distdct and thc District prescntcd contract doculllcnts bascd
     on the negotiated terms to Second Genesis. Second Genesis signed the proposed contract on August
     12, 1998. The block entitlcd "Acceptance by the District" with space lor a signaturc and date by the
     "Contracting Officer" was left blank. The proposed contract was never executed by the District. In
     the absence ora signature on behalrofthe District, this documcnt is not a writtcn contract betwcen
     the District and Second Genesis. s The law effective August 12, 1998, forbids the District
     Government from entering into any contract not in writing.




            5Appellant itselfdoes not consistelHly allege that it relied on a written contract. Paragraph 80fthe
      Complaint states (emphasis supplied):

                       In reliance upon the District's statement that it was the awardee, Second Genesis
              proceeded to mobilize its personnel and resources to perform the contract, sllch as reserving
              patient facilities, and incurred significant costs in doing so.
                          •                          :-8-
                                                                       •  SU 'ONIJ (i/iNI,SIS. INC. CAll No. D-IIOO
                                                                                                                      [7850]




IV. There is no express contract

       Whether or not a written contract is required by law, taking the allegations ofthe Complaint
most favorably to the Appellant, the Board bannot find that any contract was completed, written 01'
otherwise. "To be final, a contract must 'extend to all the terms the parties intend to introduce. and
material terms cannot be left for future settlement. '" Olllen v_ Owen, 427 A.2d 933. 938 (D.C. 1981).
The contract period was not defined.

        On the first page of the contract form signed by Second Genesis. is a box entitled "Period of
Contract." The "From" blank within that box is not completed with a date as intended, but rather
the phrase, "Date of Award," is inserted. The date to be entered into the Period of Contract block
is incorporated by reference in Article 4, "Term or Contract," which provides. "The term or the
contract shall be lflor the period of one (l) year from date award as specified on page one (I ) 0 f the
contract. ... " As a result ofthis circular reference, the dates upon which the alleged contract begins
and ends, clearly essential terms orthe agreement, are not stated or defermil1ahle 1'1'0111 the document
signed by Second Genesis. 6

        No specific contract starting date is alleged elsewhere in the Complaint. Various dates are
asserted in the Complaint, but none is identified as the inception date. Paragraph 7 asserts that on
August 12, 1997, Second Genesis signed the contract document in the presence or District officials.
Paragraph II asserts that on August 27 a scheduled tour was conducted to insure that Second
Genesis was "prepared to commence performance." That paragraph further asserts, and the Board
accepts, that on that date "the District expected to begin to utilize the beds within a matter of
weeks." (Emphasis supplied). Even viewing most favorably to the Appellant the allegation that an
inspection was conducted, it cannot be concluded that by conducting the inspection the District
acknowledged that a contact had been awarded prior to the inspection since Section E or Part 101'
the Solicitation provides: "Prior to the award of any contract ... the District will inspect the
offeror's facility. .. to substantiate the offeror's ability to provide services .... " (Emphasis
supplied). No previolls inspection is alleged. The most that can be drawn I,-omthe allegation is that
Second Genesis had been chosen for award, not that the award had been made.

        In the absence or a determinable starting and completion date or the contract. two clearly
essential terms, there can be no express contract.




          (, While the "date or award" might also be determined by the date the contract was signed by the
 District, as floted above, the proposed contract was never signed or dated by the District .
                                           .~.   \
                            •                          ~9-
                                                                           •   SU'()NlJra,NI:'SIS,INr' CAIlNolJ-l11l0
                                                                                                                        (7851]




V. No contract is effective unless      autl~orized    by law

         Regardless of whether the contract Was complete as to all terms, and regardless of whether
it was signed by the District, no contract can be entered into by the District unless all conditions
precedent required by law have been met. RDP Development Cor". v. District orColum!Jio,
                                                   ,                                .             645
A.2d 1078, 1082 (D.C. 1994); I-leydl & Patterson International, Inc. v. F. D. Rich I-lousing or Virgin
Island\', inc., 663 F.2d 419, 429 (3d Cir. 1,981).

        Second Genesis had specific notice in the Solicitation and the proposed contract doculllent
it signed August 12, 1998, that no contract couJd be awarded unless approved by the Control Board.
The Control Board Regulations provide:

               5.2 No proposed Contract ... lexceeding $9,000 for medical and human care
       services] shall be awarded or executed until and unless the Authority notifies the Contract
       Agency ... that the proposed contract has been approved by the Authority ....

                 5.3   Any proposed Contract . . . which is awarded or executed without the
        notification provided in Section 5.2 ... shall be illegal and void, and the Chief Financial
        Officer shall refuse to make payments under such Contract. ...

(Resolution to Amend Authority's Contract Review Reglllations, March 29, \996).

       Congress, in enacting the Control Board legislation, emphasized the importance or the
Authority regulations by making their violation criminal:

        Any officer or employee of the District,government who-- (A) takes any action in violation
        of any valid order oflhe Authority or fails or refuses to take any action required hy any stich
        order; or (B) prepares, presents, or certifies any information (including any projections or
        estimates) or report for the Board or allY of its agents that is fillse or misleading, or, tlpon
        learning that any Stich information is false or misleading, filils to immediately advise the
        Board or its agents thereof in writing, shall he guilty or a misdemeanor.

(Pub L. No. 104-8, Apr. 17, 1995, ~ Im( 1)1\).

       It is undisputed that the Control 130ard did not approve the proposed contract with Second
Genesis. Second Genesis was specifically notified that Control Board approval was required prior
to award. There is no allegation that Sec(Hld Genesis was erroneously advised that the Control Board
had approved the contract, nor is there any allegation that Second Genesis could reasonably have
assllmed that approval had been granted. To' the contrary, the need to confirm its proposal in
                                                                                      •
                              •                         -\ 0-
                                                                              •   SU'ONJ) (i/iN/,'S/S, /NC CAU No. D·I 100
                                                                                                                             [7852]




    November 1997, was an indication that approvals had not been given ami that the contract had not
    been awarded by that date. 7         '



            In addition to Control Board approval, City Council approval is required of any District
    government contract having a value of more than $1,000,000 (D.C. Code § 1-1130), as was the case
    here. Although specific notice of this requirement was not included in the Solicitation or proposed
    contract, a proposer to the government is deemed to have constructive notice of all published
    statutory requirements. See Federal Crop Ins. (011). v. Merrill, 332 U.S. 380,385 (1947). The
    Mayor did not submit the proposed contract to the City Council for approval until January 2, 1998.
    45 D.C. Reg. 405 (Jan. 23, 1998) (Complaint gxhibit A). Due to inaction by the City Council, the
    contract was deemed to have been approved by the Council on January 15, 1998. Even i I' only City
    Council approval were necessary, no award or a contract could have lawfully been mude to Second
    Genesis until January 15, 1998. Approval was not deemed to have been given by the City Council
\   until well after Second Genesis alleges that it began incurring cost. (Complaint'18).

           No contract between Second Genesis and the District could be lawfully made without both
    City Council and Control Board approval. Although the contract was belatedly deemed to have been
    approved by the City Council, it is undisputed that the Control Board never approved the contract
    with Second Genesis. Based on the lack of approval by the City Council, no contract could have
    rormed prior to January 15, 1998. IIowever, in the absence or any approval by the Control Board,
    no express contract could have bound the District at any time.

    VI. There is no implied-in-fact contract

           An implied-in-fact contract may arise rrom the Government's direction to perform work. the
    appellant's compliance, and the contractingorficer's tacit ratification by accepting the benclit of
    appellant's services. Digicon Corporation,. ASBCA No. 36907, 89-3 BCA '121,966 at 110,497.
    Neither the first nor third minimum requirement to create an implied-in-fact contract is present in
    this matter.


            7 Pursuant to the terms of the Solicitation, the District could only accept Second Genesis BAro for

    a period of 90 days after submission. Pnragraph 1,:25.1 entitled "Acceptance Period" provides:
                                                       ..
            The offeror agrees ... ifits best and final orfor is accepted within ninety (90) days li'om the
            date specified for submission thereof, to furnish services stated in the Price Proposal. ...
            AF Tab 12 at 73.

    The £3AFO was submitted July 10, 1997. When' the contract was not awarded by October 8, 1997, the best
    ancl final price proposal became stale. In November 1998, Second Genesis was apparently asked to
    reconfirm its price so that contract award could go forward. On November 25, 1997. Second Genesis
    confirmed its "intent to honor the pricing set forth in our technical and price proposals, ... " (AF 13). Such
    a confirmation of proposed prices is not consistent with Second Genesis' assertions that a contract had
    nlready been awarded to it.
                            •                         - t 1-
                                                                             •   Sh( ON/) C;I:NhSIS, IN(', CAll No. D-IIOO
                                                                                                                             (7853]




        There is no allegation that Appellant was directed to commence performance. That Appellant
was advised that it had won the award does not demonstrate a direction to perform. Indeed. the
written proposed contract prepared after Appellant was advised that it was selected for award
contained a specific warning that "Contractor shall not commence performance until the District has
signed this document." There is no allegation that the proposed contract was ever signed by the
District. As noted above, the fact that an inspection was conducted to determine if Appellant was
prepared to perform does not imply a direction to proceed, since the Solicitation and proposed
contract clearly state that such an inspection will be performed "prior to award."

       Reading the Complaint most favorably to the Appellant. there is no allegation that the District
accepted any benefit or Appellant's services. To the contrary, paragraph II (b) of Appellant's
Amended Compliant states: "Second Genesis did not receive patients from the District tinder
Contract No. JA-AC-DlI-70047-0 1 as signed ~)y Second Genesis on August 12. 1997."

        The absence of any allegation that Second Genesis was directed to perform. and any
allegation that the District accepted services, precludes finding an implied-in-fact contract.


VII. There has been no good faith and innocent reliance on a contl"act later determined to be
      void


        In addition to jurisdiction to consider claims arising out of valid contracts. pursuant to D.C.
Code § 1182.5(d)(2), this Board has jurisdiction over certain claims arising out of contracts entered
into in good faith, but later determined to be void ah initio. '\'. W. lf11a~il1~, I11C., CAB No. 0-806.
Jan. 23,1992,39 D.C. Reg. 4393,4398. Sec,tion I-I I 82.5(d) provides:

                 (I) Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, a contract which is entered into in
        violation of this chapter or the rules and regulations issued pursuant to this chapter is void,
        unless it is determined in a proceeding pursuant to this chapter or subsequent judicial review
        that good faith has been shown by all parties, and there has been substantial compliance with
        the provisions of the chapter and the rules and regulations.
                                                  I




                 (2) I f a contract is void, a contractor who has entered into the contract in good fa ith.
        without directly contributing to a violation and without knowledge of any violation of the
        chapter or rules Hnd regulations prior to the awarding orthe contract. shall be compensated
        for costs actually incurred.             "


        Jurisdiction pursuant to this section requires that the appellant "has cntered into a contract"
 which is later determined to be void. Forthe reasons discussed abovc, we conclude that the partics


                                             "
                              •                        -12-
                                                                            •   S/,("(INllCiliNI,S/S, INt·. CAll No 1)-1100
                                                                                                                              [7854]



    never entered into a contract. Because the parties did not enter into a contract, section 1-1182.S( d)
    is inapplicable. 8

                    The District is not estopped fi'om denying that a contnlct exists

            The Complaint seeks to avoid the consequences of the absence ora contract by asserting in
    Count II that the "District should be equitably estopped from claiming that no contract exists since
    the conduct ofthe District during the course of negotiations, and thereafter, could foreseeablyinduce,
    and in fact did induce, Second Genesis to. change is position in reliance on the District's promises.
    ~39. Regardless of the good faith of the Appellant and its dedication to serving the needs of the
    District, the doctrine of equitable estoppel does not apply to the government if its agents are without
    lawful authority to enter into the contract. Federal Crop Ins. CO/p. v. Merrill. 332 U.S. 380.385
    (1947). "The doctrine of equitable estoppel, if applicable against the government at alL C;ropp v,
\
    D, C. Board (4Dentistry, 606 A.2d 10 10, 1016 (DC 1992), may be invoked only 'where there is a
    showing of some type of 'affirmative misconduct' by a government agent.' Id. (quoting .)'c;hweiker
    v. Hansen, 450 U.S. 785, 788-90,101 S.Ct. 1468. 1470-72,67 L.Ed.2d 685 (1981); other citations
    omitted)." Robinson v. Smith, 683 A.2d 481,492-3 (D.C. 1996).

                                                   Conclusion

            Reading the allegations of the Complaint most favorably to the Appellant. the Board
    concludes that the Complaint alleges no facts which could support a finding that Second Genesis and
    the District ever entered into a contract. In the absence of any contract, even a contract later
    determined to be void, this Board is without jurisdiction. Although the alleged conduct or the
    District indicates that the agency expected Second Genesis to prepare to perform the contract and
    to acquire and reserve resources, no written contract was executed. critical terms essential to a
    contract were never agreed to, and m~lI1dato.ry approvals were not obtained. While business
    judgment may lead a contractor to incur cost so as to be ready to perform if and when the District
    awards a contract, ifthe District does not direct the performance and does not accept benefits from
    the preparations, such activities are initiated or performed at the risk ofthe Appellant until a District
    official with authority to bind the District executes the written contract. Unless a contract can be
    proved. this Board is without jurisdiction to hear any appeal.




             8 Even if we could conclude that section I-I 182.S( tI) was appl icable. Appellant fai Is to meet the
    criterion of subsection (d)(2) that it be "without knowledge of any violation of the chapter or rules and
    regulations prior to awarding the contract." Appellant was specifically on notice that approval of the Control
    Board was required prior to award. In the face of the specific notice of the requirement of approval by the
    Control Board, unless Appellant had reason to believe that the Control Bonnl hnd approved the contract.
    which is not alleged, Appellant could only hnve rensonably assumed that award was in violation of
    procurement procedures.
                             •                  -13-
                                                                   •                                        [7855]

                                                                     SI"( '()NIl ("oNI'SI.". 11\'(' ("All No 1J-IIO(l



              The District's Motioll to Dismiss is GRANTED. Appellallt's Complaillt is DISMISSED
      for lack ofjurisdiclion.




               SO ORDERED.




      DATED: February 4, 20UU                   ,
                                                 /L/s' I//d:=
                                               MATTI lEW S. WArSON
                                               Administrative .fudge

'.
      CONCURRING:

       \   /   .'
     , , \"1
          ( 'Jj~,
      ~~~~~~--~~~~~~
                    /'J- r               ;I


      LORILY: E. SIMKINS
      Chief Administrative Judge



      .10
      Administrative Judge
