              DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD



APPEAL OF:                                  )
                                            )
SUSAN BENTON                                )
2926 Upton Street, NW                       )      CAB No. D-1227
Washington, DC 20008                        )
                                            )
UNDER CONTRACT NO: N/A                      )

                           OPINION ON MOTION TO DISMISS

                                      Filing ID 36816124

       On November 30, 2010, the University of the District of Columbia (“UDC”), respondent,
requested that the Board dismiss the claim of Susan Benton Consulting Services for want of
prosecution. For the reasons set forth herein, the Board denies the motion to dismiss.

                                          BACKGROUND

        On October 29, 2003, Susan Benton filed a complaint with the CAB, alleging that she
signed a contract with UDC to perform consulting services. She alleges that she entered into a
written contract with Gerald Davis, then Director of UDC’s Science and Engineering Center, to
perform consulting services. She alleges that she submitted four invoices to UDC for May, June,
July, and August of 2002, for a total of $23,915.30. On September 9, 2002, Dean Ben Latigo of
the School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, advised Ms. Benton by e-mail that Mr. Davis
was not authorized to obligate the University for consulting services with Ms. Benton. On July
30, 2003, Mr. Wossen Encubhare, UDC Chief Contracting Officer, denied Ms. Benton’s request
for payment.

        This Board held a conference call with the parties on December 6, 2005, with Mr. Irving
Kator representing Ms. Benton and Ms. Robin Alexander representing UDC. At that time, the
parties appeared to be conducting discovery. The Board requested that the parties reserve a date
in May of 2006 for a hearing.

       The hearing did not occur. On June 3, 2008, Mr. Kator died of a heart attack in Paris,
France. He was 88 years old. In October of 2010, this Board ordered the appellant to show
cause why this appeal should not be dismissed with prejudice for failure to prosecute. Mr.
Michael J. Kator, Irving Kator’s son and law partner, entered his appearance and responded to
the Board’s request for information. UDC filed a motion requesting dismissal of the claim for
want of prosecution.

                                            DISCUSSION

        UDC asserts, correctly, that a significant time period has passed since the beginning of
the alleged contract. UDC also asserts that several UDC employees who may have been
involved with the alleged contract are no longer employed by the university. Neither party has
claimed that the opposing party has failed to participate in the discovery process. To date, this
Board has not entered a formal discovery order. The Board reminds the parties that G&S
Associates, CAB No. D-1136, June 17, 2002, involved a matter that was the subject of a hearing
order. The appellant in G&S failed to file a formal complaint, and the Board eventually
dismissed the appeal. In the present matter, the Board has not issued a formal discovery order.
Additionally, Mr. Irving Kator’s death provides at least some explanation for the present posture
of this appeal.

       Further, this Board notes that the appellant’s October 29, 2010, Response To The Board’s
Order To Show Cause states that appellant has conducted discovery, completed a number of
depositions, and requests a discovery schedule order and hearing date from the Board. Despite
previous lapses, the appellant appears ready to move forward at this time. The Board will not
allow further lapses in this case, and will move promptly to issue an updated scheduled order and
hearing date herein.

        Having said that, this Board also recognizes that appellant still has the burden of proof
regarding the existence of a valid contract between the parties. Nonetheless, under the
circumstances presented in this matter, this Board believes that appellant should have an
opportunity to present its evidence. The Board hereby denies UDC’s motion to dismiss. The
Board will discuss further discovery matters, develop the framework for an updated scheduling
order, and identify a hearing date with both parties at the next telephone conference call.

       SO ORDERED.


DATED: April 1, 2011                                       /s/ Warren J. Nash
                                                           WARREN J. NASH
                                                           Administrative Judge



Electronic Service to:

Michael Kator
Kator, Parks & Weiser, PLLC
1200 18th Street, N.W.
Suite 1000
Washington, D.C. 20036

Andrea M. Bagwell, Esq.
University General Counsel
Building 39, 3rd Floor
Office of the General Counsel
University of the District of Columbia
4200 Connecticut Avenue, N
Washington, D.C. 20008
