         DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD

APPEALS OF:


ROBERSON INTERNATIONAL, INC., et al.                  )
                                                      )       CAB Nos. D-1241, D-1224
From Debarment Decision dated July 14, 2003           )

       For the Appellant: Ronald C. Jessamy, Esq. For the District of Columbia Government:
Carlos M. Sandoval, Esq., Assistant Attorney General, Office of the Attorney General.

      Opinion by Chief Administrative Judge Jonathan D. Zischkau, with Administrative Judge
Warren J. Nash, concurring.

                                           OPINION
                                         Filing ID 30158102

        Roberson International, Inc., and its president, Steven A. Roberson, Sr., and its vice
president, Steven A. Roberson, Jr., appeal from a debarment decision by the Chief Procurement
Officer that debarred Appellants from contracting with the District government for a period of
one year. According to the debarment decision, the corporate Appellant submitted a false
bonding document purportedly representing that it had obtained bonding for a procurement when
in fact it had not. Appellants contend that the company should not have been debarred because
the president attempted to rescind the bonding submission and the consultant who prepared the
forged bonding document was terminated by Roberson. Appellants also urge that the debarment
of the president and vice president should be vacated as those individuals never received separate
notice of their proposed debarment and thus lacked an opportunity to fairly respond to the
charges. We conclude that the debarment of the corporate Appellant is supported by the record
and the law but we vacate the debarment of the individual Appellants because the District did not
provide adequate notice and opportunity to respond. Accordingly, the appeals are sustained in
part and denied in part.

                                       BACKGROUND

      The facts are not in dispute. The following findings are taken from the July 14, 2004
debarment decision:

       On July 25, 2002, the Office of Contracting and Procurement (“OCP”) issued
       Solicitation No. POAM-2002-B-00 19DR (Solicitation). Roberson submitted a
       bid for this procurement on August 29, 2002. The solicitation called for an
       indefinite delivery/indefinite quantity contract for construction services.
       Roberson submitted the third lowest bid and was being considered for the contract
       award. As a condition for award, the Solicitation required the potential awardee
       to meet certain Bonding Requirements (Section 1.5). Specifically, the Solicitation
       required the successful bidder to furnish a document from its surety company
       showing capability of securing performance and payment bonds in the amount of
                                               -2-         Roberson Int’l, CAB Nos. D-1241, D-1224


       $5 million. Moreover, the successful contractor was required to submit the
       required bonds during the issuance of the Task Order.

       On November 22, 2002, in response to the Solicitation, Roberson sent OCP a
       letter purporting to be from its bonding company, Patriot Bonding, stating that
       Roberson was bonded for $5 million in the case of a single contract award and up
       to $10 million in the case of an aggregate award.

       In reviewing the submitted letter, OCP noticed that the document was not written
       on company letterhead and did not otherwise appear to read as a typical
       suretyship verification letter. Therefore, OCP contacted the Patriot Bonding
       signatory, Leif Gibson, Associate Underwriter, to inquire about the document.

       On December 6, 2002, Mr. Gibson sent a facsimile to OCP enclosing a notarized
       affidavit of forgery from the State of Arizona, County of Maricopa, to
       acknowledge that Patriot Bonding did not send the suretyship verification letter
       received by OCP and that someone forged Mr. Gibson's signature.

(CAB No. D-1224 Notice of Appeal, Attachment).

         On December 9, 2002, Roberson’s vice president, Steven Roberson, Jr., sent an unsigned
letter to OCP’s contract specialist, regarding the submitted bond letter, informing the contract
specialist that Roberson was rescinding the previously submitted bond letter because it "was sent
prematurely." (D-1233 Appeal File (“AF”) Tab 14). Steven Roberson, Sr., sent another letter
dated December 9, 2002, advising the contract specialist that Roberson would "have bonding in
place by the close of business on December 11, 2002.” (Id.).

        On March 12, 2003, the agency chief contracting officer sent a letter notifying Roberson
that it was being proposed for debarment as a result of the false bonding verification document.
(D-1233 AF Tab 11). The letter was addressed to Steven A. Roberson, President of Roberson
International, Inc., and contained a subject line reading: “Re: Proposed Debarment/Suspension
Action (Roberson International).” A reading of the relevant portions of the letter indicates only
that the company is being proposed for debarment:

       This letter is to inform you that the Chief Procurement Officer (CPO), Office of
       Contracting and Procurement (OCP), District of Columbia, is proposing
       debarment of Roberson International, Inc. (Roberson) from consideration for
       award of District contracts and subcontracts.

       ....

       The CPO is proposing the debarment of Roberson for submitting a false bonding
       document in an effort to receive a District contract award. The action by Roberson
       was taken in an effort to defraud the District and obtain a public contract. Such
       action provides a significant indication of Roberson's lack of business integrity.
       Moreover, Roberson's action was sufficiently serious and compelling to affect
                                                -3-         Roberson Int’l, CAB Nos. D-1241, D-1224


       Roberson's responsibility as a District government contractor in responding to
       Solicitation No. POAM-2002-B-OO 19DR.

       This letter serves as notice of the proposed debarment action against Roberson.
       As of the date of this notice, the District will not solicit offers from, award
       contracts to, renew, or otherwise extend contracts with, or consent to subcontracts
       with Roberson pending a debarment decision.

       Within thirty business days after receipt of this notice, Roberson must submit to
       OCP, in person, in writing, or through a representative, information addressing
       the aforementioned issues raised regarding this matter. In addition, Roberson
       may submit any additional specific information that raises a genuine issue of
       material fact. If a response from Roberson is not received by OCP within the
       thirty-day period, OCP will make a final decision to debar Roberson on the basis
       of available information in its possession. Attached you will find a copy of the
       applicable District regulations articulating the procedures governing debarment.

       According to D.C. Official Code §2-308.04(f), the debarment or suspension of
       any person or business shall constitute a debarment or suspension of any affiliate
       of that person or business. Affiliate means any business in which a suspended or
       debarred person is an officer or has a substantial financial interest (as defined by
       regulations), and any business that has a substantial direct or indirect ownership
       interest (as defined by regulations), in the suspended or debarred business, or in
       which the suspended or debarred business has a substantial direct or indirect
       ownership interest.

        On April 11, 2003, Roberson responded to the notice of proposed debarment by stating
that Roberson had rescinded the forged suretyship verification document and that the company’s
president, Steven Roberson, Sr., was recuperating from a kidney transplant during the
procurement phase, that a company consultant had submitted the forged verification document,
and that the services of the consultant had been terminated. In its response, Roberson argued that
the circumstances did not warrant debarment or suspension and that if the charges were not
dismissed, Roberson demanded a hearing and a copy of current applicable debarment
regulations. (D-1233 AF Tab 12).

       In a letter dated May 19, 2003, the Chief Procurement Officer replied to Roberson’s letter
of April 11, stating that Roberson had raised an issue of fact relating to the “circumstances
surrounding the attempt by Mr. Roberson to rescind the false bonding document” and set a
hearing for May 30. The subject line of the letter reads: “Re: Proposed Debarment/Suspension
Action (Roberson International, Inc.).” (D-1233 AF Tab 13). In a May 29, 2003 letter, counsel
for Roberson stated that Roberson’s president and vice president would be witnesses at the
hearing, and attached copies of their December 9, 2002 letters to the contract specialist. (D-1233
AF Tab 14).

        On May 30, 2003, the CPO conducted a hearing in the debarment proceeding. The CPO
began the hearing as follows: “In meeting my responsibilities as the Chief Procurement Officer,
I also serve as the buying official under the [Procurement Practices Act]. By a letter dated
                                              -4-         Roberson Int’l, CAB Nos. D-1241, D-1224


March 12, OCP informed Roberson International, Incorporated, hereinafter referred to as
Roberson, of its proposed debarment from consideration for award of District contracts and
subcontracts.” (D-1233 AF Tab 15). By letter of June 4, 2003 to Roberson’s counsel, containing
a subject line reading: “Re: Proposed Debarment/Suspension Action (Roberson International,
Inc.),” the CPO stated: “Thank you for meeting me on May 30, 2003. The purpose of your visit
was to provide your client, Roberson International, Inc. (Roberson) an informal hearing to
discuss facts in dispute material to the proposed debarment of Roberson.” (D-1233 AF Tab 16).

      On July 14, 2003, the CPO issued his final decision on the proposed debarment action of
Roberson. The decision states:

       On November 22, 2002, OCP received the false bonding document from
       Roberson. Upon receiving the letter, OCP contacted the bonding company to
       verify its accuracy. Exactly two weeks later, on Friday, December 6, 2002, the
       bonding company provided information identifying the document as false. On
       Monday, December 9, 2002, Mr. Roberson wrote two letters to OCP attempting to
       rescind the false document. Although no evidence was presented at the informal
       hearing to suggest that OCP informed Roberson of the falsity before Mr.
       Roberson attempted to rescind the document, the submission of a false bonding
       document to obtain a contract is sufficiently serious and compelling to affect
       Roberson's present responsibility.

       Roberson's actions were sufficiently serious and compelling to affect its present
       responsibility as a District government contractor. Such is the case despite Mr.
       Roberson's attempt to rescind the false bonding document on December 9, 2002.
       Although Mr. Roberson made an attempt to rescind the document, the fact
       remains that Roberson submitted a false bonding document in an effort to obtain a
       District contract. However, Mr. Roberson's attempt to rescind the false document
       was considered when I decided the debarment period.

       ....

       Given the circumstances of this matter, I am debarring Roberson, its principals,
       and its affiliates from consideration for award of District contracts and
       subcontracts for one-year. Mr. Roberson's attempt to rescind the false document
       was considered in making this decision. In rendering this decision, however, the
       CPO placed great emphasis on the fact that Roberson submitted a false bonding
       document to obtain a District award. In addition, Roberson presented no evidence
       in writing or at the informal hearing to suggest it had or will take remedial
       measures to ensure that similar events will not occur in the future.

       ....

       This debarment decision is applicable to the principals of Roberson. The
       identified principals of Roberson are: Steven Roberson Sr., President, and Steven
       Roberson Jr., Vice President. The principals of Roberson are being debarred
       under the applicable standard. Individuals can be debarred if they "participated
                                                 -5-         Roberson Int’l, CAB Nos. D-1241, D-1224


          in, knew of or had reason to know" of the contractor's misconduct. Novicki v.
          Cook, 946 F.2d 938 (D.C. Cir. 1991). Roberson asserts the company consultant
          facilitated the submission of the false document. However, principals are usually
          responsible for the actions of their employees. Therefore, the principals knew of
          or had reason to know of the consultant's misconduct in submitting the false
          bonding document.

(D-1233 AF Tab 17). The company and the two principals were debarred for a period of one
year from March 12, 2003, through March 12, 2004. On September 12, 2003, Appellants filed
an appeal docketed as CAB No. D-1224, but the appeal was voluntarily dismissed when the
District initiated a new debarment proceeding challenged by Appellants in CAB No. D-1233.
The original debarment period concluded on March 12, 2004, despite the subsequent attempts by
the District to reopen the debarment proceeding and impose additional debarment penalties on
Roberson and its principals. See Roberson International, Inc., et al., CAB No. D-1233, Sept. 9,
2004, 52 D.C. Reg. 4229. On September 10, 2004, Roberson filed a notice of appeal docketed as
CAB No. D-1241, to contest the propriety of the July 14, 2003 debarment decision by the CPO.
In a status conference of March 11, 2010, the parties agreed that the case should be resolved on
the written record, including the District’s October 13, 2004 combined motion to dismiss and
motion for summary judgment.

                                          DISCUSSION

          We exercise jurisdiction over these appeals pursuant to D.C. Code §§ 2-308.04(d) and 2-
309.03.

        Roberson International challenges its one-year debarment as being contrary to the
findings of the CPO and the evidence adduced at the hearing. The corporate Appellant also
argues that the debarment decision is a nullity because the debarment regulations are outdated
and not consistent with the procurement law changes made by the Procurement Reform
Amendment Act of 1996. We sustain the CPO’s debarment decision regarding Roberson
International. The record amply supports the CPO’s conclusion that the company’s submission
of a forged bonding verification in order to obtain contract award was sufficiently serious and
compelling evidence of a lack of business integrity and ethics that undermined its present
responsibility. Although it had an opportunity at the hearing, Appellant did not introduce
testimony from Steven Roberson, Sr., or Steven Roberson, Jr., regarding their knowledge of the
forged bonding document and its submission as part of the company’s bid. We discern no legal
error in the CPO’s conclusion that the remedial actions taken by Roberson International after the
fact of forgery became known to the District were insufficient to find the company presently
responsible. Regarding Roberson International’s challenge to the debarment regulations, it fails
to point to any specific regulatory prescription in 27 DCMR Chapter 22 that was applied to its
debarment proceeding in a manner inconsistent with the debarment provisions found in D.C.
Code § 2-308.04. Moreover, Roberson International has demonstrated no prejudice arising from
any application of the debarment regulations to it.

      Steven Roberson, Sr., and Steven Roberson, Jr., the individual Appellants, challenge the
CPO’s decision to impose the same one-year debarment on them as affiliates. They argue that
                                                 -6-         Roberson Int’l, CAB Nos. D-1241, D-1224


the March 12, 2003 notice of proposed debarment only identified Roberson International, Inc., as
the entity being proposed for debarment.

         The Procurement Practices Act requires “reasonable notice to a person or a business and
reasonable opportunity to be heard” before the District may impose debarment or suspension.
D.C. Code § 2-308.04. Due process itself mandates such notice and an opportunity to be heard.
ATL, Inc. v. United States, 736 F.2d 677, 682-83 (Fed. Cir. 1984); Transco Security, Inc. of
Ohio, et al. v. Freeman, 639 F.2d 318, 323 (6th Cir.), cert. denied 454 U.S. 820 (1981); Gonzalez
v. Freeman, 334 F.2d 570, 574 (D.C. Cir. 1964). The debarment regulations specify the form
and manner of the notice and opportunity to be heard. 27 DCMR § 2213.3 provides: “The
[CPO] may extend the debarment decision to include any affiliates of the contractor by
specifically naming the affiliate and giving the affiliate written notice of the proposed debarment
and an opportunity to respond in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.” 27 DCMR §
2214.1 provides in relevant part: “The [CPO] shall initiate debarment proceedings by notifying
the contractor and any specifically named affiliates by certified mail, return receipt requested, of
the following: (a) The reasons for the proposed debarment in sufficient detail to put the
contractor on notice of the conduct or transaction(s) upon which the proposed debarment is based
. . . .” In Fort Myer Construction Corp., CAB No. D-1223, Dec. 9, 2003, 52 D.C. Reg. 4155,
4156-58, we concluded on very similar facts as here that the debarments of the individual
Appellants in Fort Myer were void ab initio because the District had failed to provide adequate
written notice to each principal. In the present case, neither the initial notice of proposed
debarment of Roberson International, nor any of the subsequent correspondence from the CPO
prior to the debarment decision, put the individual Appellants on notice that they individually
and specifically were being considered for debarment. Accordingly, we conclude that the
debarments of Steven Roberson, Sr., and Steven Roberson, Jr., are void ab initio.

                                         CONCLUSION

       We conclude that the debarment of the corporate Appellant, Roberson International, Inc.,
is supported by the record and the law but we vacate the debarment of the individual Appellants
because the District did not provide adequate notice and opportunity to respond. Accordingly,
the appeals are sustained in part and denied in part.

       SO ORDERED.

DATED: March 19, 2010                                  /s/ Jonathan D. Zischkau
                                                       JONATHAN D. ZISCHKAU
                                                       Chief Administrative Judge


CONCURRING:


/s/ Warren J. Nash
WARREN J. NASH
Administrative Judge
