                                   GOVERNMENT OF THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA
                                  CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD

APPEAL OF:

          THE PRINCIPALS of                                             )
          FORT MYER CONSTRUCTION CORPORATION                            )
                                                                        )
          JOSE RODRIGUEZ,                                               )
          President                                                     )
                                                                        )
                   and                                                  )        CAB No. D-1235
                                                                        )
          LEWIS SHRENSKY,                                               )
          Executive Vice President                                      )
                                                                        )
          Decision of the Debarment and Suspension Panel                )
          To Debar Messrs. Rodriguez and Shrensky                       )


       For the Appellant: Joe Robert Caldwell, Jr., Esq., and O. Kevin Vincent, Esq., Baker
Botts L.L.P. For the Government: Keith D. Coleman, Esq., Assistant Attorney General.

       Opinion by Administrative Judge Matthew S. Watson with Chief Administrative Judge
Jonathan D. Zischkau, concurring.


                                                     OPINION
                                           (LexisNexis Filing ID 4664236)



        This matter is an appeal from a final decision dated April 2, 2004, of the Debarment and
Suspension Panel (“Panel”) created by the Debarment Procedures Emergency Act of 2003, (D.C.
Act 15-153, 50 D.C. Reg. 8730), debarring Appellants Jose Rodriguez and Lewis Shrensky,
president and vice president, respectively, of Fort Myer Construction Corporation1 (“Fort Myer”
or “the Company”) for a period of six months2 on the basis of a conviction of the Company of a
scheme to defraud the District. Appellants contend first, that the debarment decision is defective
because the Appellants were not given notice as to the grounds for their proposed debarment

1
    The decision also debarred the company; however, that portion of the decision has not been appealed.
2
   The decision provided that the debarred parties be given credit for the time they were suspended during the
pendency of the debarment procedures, thus resulting in the parties’ immediate eligibility to receive contract awards.
Although, as to being eligible for awards, the debarment is now moot, the fact of a past debarment may have a
continuing detrimental effect on the reputation of the parties and their success in carrying on their business and may
therefore be appealed notwithstanding that the disqualification from receiving contracts has expired. Caiola v.
Carroll, 851 F.2d 395, 401 (D.C. Cir. 1988).
                                                2      Principals of Fort Myer Constr. Corp., CAB No. D-1235



prior to the Panel’s hearing of the matter; and second, that the District failed to meet its burden
of proof that the Appellants participated in, knew of, or had reason to know of the company’s
unlawful scheme. The Board finds that, in the particular circumstances of this matter, sufficient
notice was given to the Appellants, however, the Board further finds that the Panel’s decision as
to the Appellants is not supported by adequate evidence. Accordingly, the Panel’s debarments of
Jose Rodriguez and Lewis Shrensky are vacated.

                                        BACKGROUND

        By letter dated April 25, 2003, the District proposed debarring Fort Myer based on its
March 14, 2003 guilty plea to “conspiracy to commit bribery in connection with [the
Company’s] role in distributing cash bribes to District Department of Public Works (DPW)
officials in exchange for the DPW officials agreeing to accept inflated job tickets for asphalt
materials that were never provided to the District.” (Complaint, Ex. 8). Neither of the Appellants
was charged or otherwise named in the criminal action. The notice of proposed debarment
advised the Company that it was suspended immediately. The Company appealed the
suspension to the Board on the basis that it was not afforded an opportunity to respond before the
suspension was imposed. The Board denied the appeal holding that a contractor may be
suspended without a hearing. Fort Myer Construction Corp., CAB No. D-1206, June 6, 2003, 50
D.C. Reg. 7505.

        The April 2003 notice of proposed debarment to the Company advised that “[a]ccording
to D.C. Official Code §2-308.04(f), the debarment or suspension of any person or business shall
constitute a debarment or suspension of any affiliate of that person or business.” (Complaint, Ex.
8). Although principals are defined as affiliates by the cited code section, separate notice was
not given to Fort Myer’s principals, Mr. Rodriguez and Mr. Shrensky, as required by 27 DCMR
§§ 2213.3 and 2214.1. On July 8, 2003, after a hearing, the Chief Procurement Officer ordered
the debarment of Fort Myer and its two principals. On appeal of the July 8 debarment order, the
Board held the debarments of the individual principals to be void ab initio for failure to have
given written notice to each principal by certified mail. Fort Myer Construction Corp., CAB No.
D-1223, Dec. 9, 2003. The Board further vacated and remanded the debarment of the Company
for failure of the CPO to make a finding supported by substantial evidence that the company
lacked “present responsibility.” Fort Myer Construction Corp., CAB No. D-1223, Jan. 16, 2004.

        In October 2003, a temporary Debarment and Suspension Panel was authorized with
jurisdiction over pending debarments. (D.C. Act 15-153). On remand, the debarments of the
Company and its principals were heard by the newly established panel. Separate notice of the
Panel hearing was sent by certified mail to the Company and each of the two individual affiliated
principals on December 24, 2003. (Complaint, Ex. 2). The notice by the Debarment and
Suspension Panel incorporated the cause for proposed debarment by reference to the notice given
by the CPO in the initial debarment proceeding:

       The reasons for the proposed debarment and the causes relied upon for the
       proposed debarment are set forth in the attached letter dated April 25, 2003 from
                                                   3      Principals of Fort Myer Constr. Corp., CAB No. D-1235



      Jerry Carter to [Fort Myer], the letter dated May 30, 2003 from [the CPO] to [Fort
      Myer] and the letter dated June 24 2003, from [the CPO] to [FMC Civil].3
      In a final decision dated April 2, 2004, the Debarment and Suspension Panel debarred the
Company and its principals, Mr. Rodriguez and Mr. Shrensky, for a period of six months.
(Complaint, Ex. 1). The individual principals have appealed their debarments.


                                            DISCUSSION


       We exercise jurisdiction over the appeal of these debarment actions pursuant to D.C.
Code § 2-308.04(d).


Notice of cause for debarment

         While admitting that the District gave notice of the rehearing by certified mail addressed
individually to each of the Appellants as required by the regulations, Appellants assert that the
notices did not meet the complete requirements of the regulations because the notices failed to
advise the Appellants of the grounds upon which their individual debarments were proposed. 27
DCMR § 2214.1(a). The December 23, 2003 Panel notices (directed separately to the Company
and each of the principals individually) incorporated by reference the causes stated in the notice
letter of April 25, 2003. The grounds for debarment were stated in the earlier notice as follows:

        The CPO is proposing the debarment of Fort Myer for conviction for bribery and
        for submitting false tickets to facilitate payment for asphalt materials not provided
        to the District. Such actions provide a significant indication of Fort Myer’s lack
        of business integrity. Moreover, Fort Myer’s action was sufficiently serious and
        compelling to affect Fort Myer’s responsibility as a District government
        contractor.

       Notice of proposed debarment need only be given “in sufficient detail to put the [party]
on notice of the conduct or transaction(s) upon which the proposed debarment is based.” 27
DCMR § 2214.1(a). “Sufficient detail” is a matter of due process.

        The content of the due process requirement in a particular instance is determined on the
        facts specifically involved. The adequacy of the procedures are not to be based on the
        validity of general regulations, but upon the facts of the case. Mathews v. Eldridge, 424
        U.S. 319, 335, 96 S. Ct. 893, 903, 47 L. Ed. 2d 18 (1976). Due process, unlike some legal
        rule, is not a technical conception with a fixed content unrelated to time, place and
        circumstances. Cafeteria Workers v. McElroy, 367 U.S. 886, 895, 81 S. Ct. 1743, 1748, 6
        L. Ed. 2d 1230 (1961). Due process is flexible and calls for such procedural protections
        as the particular situation demands. Morrissey v. Brewer, 408 U.S. 471, 481, 92 S. Ct.
        2593, 2600, 33 L. Ed. 2d 484 (1972).

3
 FMC Civil Construction, LLC, is a company formed by the Fort Myer principals and certain of their family
members. FMC Civil was subsequently reorganized to remove Mr. Rodreguez and Mr. Shrensky from any
management, ownership or control. Final Decision of the Panel, 14.
                                                 4      Principals of Fort Myer Constr. Corp., CAB No. D-1235




Electro-Methods, Inc. v. United States, 3 Cl. Ct. 500, 509 (1983), quoted with approval, but
reversed on other grounds, 728 F.2d 1471, 1476 (Fed. Cir. 1984).

        Although better practice would be to specifically state the grounds for the proposed
individual debarments of the affiliated principals, the Board believes that the only reasonable
interpretation of the notices sent specifically to the individuals, although referring only to the
Company’s criminal conviction and without any reference to any specific action of the
individuals, is that the notices advise the individuals that they may be debarred if they had reason
to know of the Company’s criminal conduct referenced in the notice as provided in 27 DCMR §
2217.3. As such, the individuals were on notice of the grounds being considered for their
possible debarment.

Evidence supporting debarment

       A corporation acts only through the individuals who are its officers, employees or agents.
With regard to debarment, a corporation is vicariously liable for the actions of the individuals
who act in its behalf. 27 DCMR § 2217.2 provides:

       The fraudulent, criminal, or other seriously improper conduct of any officer, director,
       shareholder, partner, employee, or other individual associated with a contractor may be
       imputed to the contractor when the conduct occurred in connection with the individual's
       performance of duties for or on behalf of the contractor, or with the contractor's
       knowledge, approval, or acquiescence. The contractor's acceptance of the benefits
       derived from the conduct shall be evidence of knowledge, approval, or acquiescence.

A corporation clearly may be debarred if persons controlling the corporation are involved in or
have knowledge of and acquiesce to the wrongdoing. But knowledge by those in control of a
corporation is not an essential element to proceed with debarment of a corporation. To debar a
corporation, it is only necessary that the suspect action have been taken in the course of
performance of corporate duties by any individual acting for the corporation. No person other
than the wrongdoer is required to have had knowledge of the wrongdoing. To support the
debarment of a corporation, it is only necessary to show that the wrongful act was taken on
behalf of the corporation. Liability, and indeed knowledge, will be imputed to the corporation if
the corporation accepts benefits derived from the wrongful action. Dowling Group v. Williams,
1982 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 18121 (D.D.C. 1982). (Parent corporation debarred as an affiliate of a
subsidiary whose general manager submitted false claims to the government.)

        Similarly, an individual affiliated with a corporation may be subject to debarment based
on the actions of others acting on behalf of the corporation. The evidence, however, necessary to
support debarment of an individual based on actions of others within a corporation is
significantly different than the evidence necessary to debar a corporation based on conduct of its
agents. To debar an individual based on affiliation with a culpable corporation, however,
requires a showing that the individual “participated in, knew of, or had reason to know of” the
wrongful conduct. 27 DCMR § 2217.3 provides:

       The fraudulent, criminal, or other seriously improper conduct of a contractor may be
                                                       5      Principals of Fort Myer Constr. Corp., CAB No. D-1235



        imputed to any officer, director, shareholder, partner, employee, or other individual
        associated with the contractor who participated in, knew of, or had reason to know of the
        contractor's conduct.

      The Panel did not find that either of the Appellants participated in, or had actual
knowledge of, the conduct which led to the Company’s guilty plea. (Final Decision of Panel 16-
17). Nevertheless, the District argues that the Appellants had reason to know of the unlawful
conduct because of their official positions in the Company. The District’s answer to the
complaint states:

        Messrs. Rodriguez and Shrensky had reason to know of the false tickets produced by Fort
        Myer for asphalt never provided to the District. Messrs. Rodriguez and Shrensky were
        managing members of Fort Myer during the time of Fort Myer’s misconduct. Mr.
        Rodriguez was responsible for field operations and Mr. Shrensky was responsible for the
        financial and administrative operations of the company. Messrs. Rodriguez and Shrensky
        had reason to know of the misconduct because they became aware of certain activities
        that raised their suspicions. See Appellants Ex. 1. p.16. “These activities included the
        provision of vehicles to District government officials in the course of performance of
        contracts, use of Fort Myer gas pumps by [District] inspectors, and [District] inspectors
        [improperly] being on the premises of the Fort Myer plant.” Id.             As such, the
        [Debarment and Suspension Panel] found that Messrs. Rodriguez and Shrensky had
        reason to know of the improper conduct occurring at Fort Myer. Resolution of this issue
        requires a full hearing on the merits. Therefore, to the extent Appellants seek to reverse
        and vacate the DSP’s debarment decision based on this issue, the District respectfully
        requests a hearing on the merits

Answer, 7.

        Essentially, the Panel relied on Rodrequez’ and Shrensky’s status as officers in
concluding that the Appellants had reason to know of the specific unlawful conduct for which
the Company plead guilty and was debarred. Even accepting that the Appellants, because of
their knowledge of some other improper conduct by their employees,4 should have been wary of
other unlawful schemes, it cannot logically be concluded that this constitutes evidence that they
had reason to know of the specific bribery scheme which resulted in the Company’s conviction.
In order to hold an individual liable for specific wrongdoing by fellow employees, there must be
some evidence connecting the individual proposed to be debarred to the wrongdoing, or some
showing that the individual had information from which wrongdoing could reasonably be
inferred. Status is an impermissible basis for an imputation of knowledge to an individual.
Novicki v. Cook, 946 F.2d 938, 942 (D.C. Cir. 1991). In Novicki, the court held that a connection
to the wrongdoing more than Mr. Novicki’s merely being president of the corporation was
required to support his personal debarment and vacated the debarment of Mr. Novicki as an
individual. (Id.)

      We now address the District’s request for a hearing before the Board on the merits of
whether the principals had reason to know of the bribery scheme. Although it is not clear that

4
  It should be noted that the Company was not prosecuted for the alleged separate misconduct, nor did it form the
basis of the Company’s debarment.
                                                6     Principals of Fort Myer Constr. Corp., CAB No. D-1235



the Board, even in a de novo review, has authority to receive new evidence from the District
which was not presented to the debarring authority to support a debarment, the District requested
a hearing on the merits. (Answer, 7). Without determining the extent to which the District may
supplement the debarment record, the Board requested a proffer of evidence, other than the status
of the Appellants, which might be presented at a hearing showing any relationship of the
Appellants to the Company’s misconduct or any reason for the Appellants to have known of the
misconduct. Such evidence could have been, for instance, a showing that Company funds over
which the officer had control were used in furtherance of the unlawful scheme or that the officer
had received complaints relating to the unlawful conduct.

        In a telephone conference with the parties held by the Board on October 15, 2004, the
District advised the Board that there was no evidence supporting debarment of the Appellants
other than the inferences referenced in the Panel decision. As a result, there is no basis to hold
an evidentiary hearing because the District has no additional evidence. Because we have
concluded that those inferences relied upon by the Panel alone do not constitute substantial
evidence that the Appellants had reason to know of the bribery scheme for which the Company
pled guilty, we vacate the Panel’s debarments of Jose Rodriguez and Lewis Shrensky.



November 23, 2004                                         /s/ Matthew S. Watson
                                                    MATTHEW S. WATSON
                                                    Administrative Judge



CONCURRING:



       /s/ Jonathan D. Zischkau
JONATHAN D. ZISCHKAU
Chief Administrative Judge
