                DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD

APPEAL OF:

COMPREHENSIVE COMMUNITY HEALTH                                   )
                                                                 )       CAB No. D-1467
Under Contract No. CSOSA ll-CT-0014                              )


       For the appellant: Donald M. Temple, Esq. For the District of Columbia: Brett A. Baer,
Esq., Assistant Attorney General.

      Opinion by Administrative Judge Maxine E. McBean with Chief Administrative Judge Marc
D. Loud, Sr., concurring.

                                 ORDER DISMISSING APPEAL
                                           Filing ID #53909542

        On February 26, 2013, Comprehensive Community Health (“appellant”) filed a notice of
appeal challenging the termination of its Contract No. CSOSA ll-CT-0014 (the “Contract”) by the
Director, Office of Procurement, Court Services and Offender Supervision Agency (“CSOSA”).
The appellant had been providing psychiatric evaluations, interventions, medication management
services, and training at CSOSA’s Re-Entry and Sanctions Center. (Notice of Appeal 1.) The
District has not filed an answer herein, but has moved to dismiss this action on the ground that the
Board lacks jurisdiction over CSOSA because it is a federal agency. (Mot. to Dismiss 1-3.) The
appellant has not filed an opposition to the District’s motion to dismiss, nor has the appellant filed its
complaint herein pursuant to D.C. Mun. Regs. tit. 27, § 204 (2002). Upon review of the District’s
motion to dismiss, the lack of opposition thereto, and the entire record herein, we dismiss appellant’s
claim with prejudice.

       The Board’s jurisdiction over contractor claims is conferred by D.C. Code § 2-360.03(b)
(2011). In pertinent part, this section provides:

                Jurisdiction of the Board shall be consistent with the coverage of this
                chapter as set forth in § 2-351.05, except that the Board may enter
                into fee-for-service agreements with agencies, departments, boards,
                commissions, and instrumentalities of the District or other public
                entities that are not subject to the Board's jurisdiction. The
                agreements shall provide for the Board to resolve contract disputes,
                including appeals and protests of those agencies, departments, boards,
                commissions, and instrumentalities. With agreements of the parties,
                the Board may provide alternate dispute resolution services.

                D.C. Code § 2-360.03(b)

The referenced D.C. Code § 2-351.05(a), in turn, subjects “all subordinate agencies,
instrumentalities, and employees of the District government, independent agencies, boards, and
                                      -2-                       Comprehensive Community Health
                                                                                   CAB No. D-1467

commissions” to the jurisdiction of the Board (emphasis added). Id. The Board finds that it does
not have jurisdiction over CSOSA because CSOSA is not an agency, instrumentality, board or
commission of the District government, subject to the District’s procurement statute.

      We also note that D.C. Code § 24-133 established CSOSA. Under § 24-133, CSOSA was
founded thusly (in pertinent part):

               (a) Establishment. -- There is established within the executive branch
               of the Federal Government the Court Services and Offender
               Supervision Agency for the District of Columbia (hereafter in this
               section referred to as the “Agency”) which shall assumes its duties
               not less than one year or more than three years after August 5, 1997.

               (b) Director. --

               (1) Appointment and compensation. -- The Agency shall be headed by
               a Director appointed by the President, by and with the advice and
               consent of the Senate, for a term of six years. The Director shall be
               compensated at the rate prescribed for Level IV of the Executive
               Schedule, and may be removed from office prior to the expiration of
               term only for neglect of duty, malfeasance in office, or other good
               cause shown.

               (2) Powers and duties of Director. -- The Director shall:

               (A) Submit annual appropriation requests for the Agency to the
               Office of Management and Budget;

               (B) Determine, in consultation with the Chief Judge of the United
               States District Court for the District of Columbia, the Chief Judge of
               the Superior Court of the District of Columbia, and the Chairman of
               the United States Parole Commission, uniform supervision and
               reporting practices for the Agency; …

               Id.

       Therefore, it is clear to the Board from the plain language of D.C. Code § 24-133 that
CSOSA is a federal agency. The statute describes CSOSA as a federal agency; its Director is
appointed by the President, paid according to the federal payment schedule and confirmed by the
United States Senate. CSOSA’s annual appropriation requests are made directly to the federal Office
of Management and Budget. Conversely, this Board’s jurisdiction is limited to District agencies as
per the language provided in D.C. Code § 2-351.05(a). Accordingly, we grant the District’s
unopposed motion, and dismiss this matter with prejudice.
                                    -3-           Comprehensive Community Health
                                                                 CAB No. D-1467

SO ORDERED.

Date: August 27, 2013                     /s/ Maxine E. McBean
                                          MAXINE E. MCBEAN
                                          Administrative Judge

CONCURRING:

/s/ Marc D. Loud, Sr.
MARC D. LOUD, SR.
Chief Administrative Judge



Electronic Service:

Donald M. Temple, Esq.
1101 15th Street, N.W., Suite 910
Washington, D.C. 20005

Brett A. Baer, Esq.
Assistant Attorney General
441 4th Street, N.W., 6th Floor South
Washington, D.C. 20001
