                 GOVERNMENT OF THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA
                        CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD

PROTEST OF:

         FAITH CONSTRUCTION COMPANY                    )
                                                       )      CAB No. P-75
         Under IFB No. 87-0074-AA-2-0-KA               )

      For the Protester: Carroll B. Harvey, Chairman/CEO.          For the Government:
John D. Turner Jr., Assistant Corporation Counsel, D.C.

      Opinion by Administrative Judge Davis with Administrative Judges Booker and
Marlin concurring.

                                        OPINION

      This protest was filed by the Faith Construction Company (Faith).!! As the
second low bidder, Faith protests the contract award to the low bidder, Espina Stone
Company (Espina), pursuant to Invitation for Bids No. 87-0074-AA-2-0-KA (IFB). The
IFB was issued to solicit bids for the project: Traffic Signal System Pavement Repair
Contract No.2. See the agency report, Exh. Nos. 3A and 3B.

       Included among other documents in the IFB package is a form captioned:
Certification District of Columbia Department of Public Works Disadvantaged Business
Enterprise/Women-Owned Business Enterprise Solicitation (certification form). This
form reads in pertinent part as follows:
                                           ***
[First         I certify that I have read, understand and wiH comply with
 Par.]         the United States Department of Transportation Regulations,
               49 CFR Part 23, as amended, that establishes Disadvantaged
               and Women-Owned Business Enterprise goals for Federally-
               assisted construction contracts.

[Second        Further, I certify that as a certified Disadvantaged Business
 Par.]         Enterprise, I will meet the DBE goal for this Sheltered
               Market contract. I am also aware that a goal of 2% of the


  !!This case originated during the period when the District of Columbia Contract Ap-
peals Board was functioning pursuant to Commissioner's Order No.9, D.C. Code, Sup-
plement V (1978), as amended by Mayor's Order 86-65, 33 DCR 3006 (May 16, 1986).
Pursuant to the D.C. Procurement Practices Act of 1985 (PPA), D.C. Code, § 1-1189.1
(1987), a new independent agency denominated as the Contract Appeals Board was
created. This new Board became operational on August 1, 1988, and succeeded to the
jurisdiction of an cases pending before the previously established Board.
                                          -     2 -

              contract price has been established for performance by
              Women-Owned firms. I win meet the goals or demonstrate
              reasonable, sufficient good faith efforts to meet the goals.

[Third        Additionally, I certify that, I am aware that, in order to
 Par]         remain in consideration for award of this contract after bid
              opening, I win furnish with my bid proposal a DBE/WBE
              plan in accordance with the Special Provisions entitled
              "DISADVANTAGED/WOMEN -OWNED                       BUSINESS
              ENTERPRISE PARTICIPATION" on the day of the bid
              opening.

                                              '" '" '"
[Fifth        A bidder's failure to submit this certification or submission
 Par.]        of a false certification shaH render his/her bid non-responsive.
              (Underlining original.)

        Faith alleges that the apparent low bidder Espina failed to submit the required
DBE/WBE plan with its bid proposal as was mandated by paragraph three of the
certification. The signing of the DBE/WBE certification form by Espina, says Faith,
when the specified DBE/WBE plan was not included with Espina's bid submission means
that the certification C. . . I am aware that, in order to remain in consideration for
award of this contract. . . I will furnish with my bid proposal a DBE/WBE plan. . . ")
was in fact false. Faith next alleges that the language of paragraph five of the
certification mandates that Espina be disqualified, as nonresponsive, from receiving the
contract award. Relying on the previously stated allegations, Faith alleges that it is the
lowest responsible and responsive bidder. See protest letter at 1 and 2.

       The District does not dispute Faith's allegation that Espina did not include in its
bid submission the DBE/WBE plan specified in the certification form. Y Nor does the
District refute Faith's allegation that Espina's signing of the certification when the
DBE/WBE plan had not been included means the certification is false. Essentially, the
District's position is that Espina's failure to include the DBE/WBE plan with its bid was
not fatal to contract award because the matter of the plan submission goes to
responsibility and not responsiveness. In support of this argument, the District
contends:

         1.   The IFB's Specifications use responsibility language and do
              not unambIguously state a requirement that the DBE/WBE
              plan be furnished with the bid submission;




 YAccording to the District, Espina's DBE/WBE plan was submitted on October 22,
1987. See the agency report at 1. The bid opening occurred on October 16, 1987. Id.
                                         - 3 -

      2.     The DBE/WBE plan does not effect bid price, quality or a
             firm's ability to properly perform the task prescribed in the
             IFB specifications; and

      3.     The accepmnce of Espina's bid would cn:~ate a valid and
             binding contract requiring Espina to perform in accordance
             with the terms of the IFB, and the information sought by the
             DBE/WBE plan concerns only how Espina's contractual
             commitment would be fum lied.

       Espina submitted comments on the agency report. As Espina argues similarly to
the District, we do not detail its arguments but proceed with our discussion of the
merits of Faith's protest.

       This case presents two issues for resolution: (1) whether a bidder's failure to
furnish the DBE/WBE plan by bid submission time results in the bidder being
nonresponsive, and (2) whether the fifth paragraph of the DBE/WBE certification form
mandates that a bidder be deemed nonresponsive where it submits a false certification
as alleged by Faith.

       The Board has had on at least three previous occasions the opportunity to
address the failure to furnish issue vis. !! vis a responsive/responsible bidder. Forrester
Constructors, Inc., 1 P.D. 74, 78-79 (D.C. CAB 1987); ZAV Electrical Contractors, Inc.,
CAB No. P-76 (D.C. CAB 1988); and W.M. Schlosser Co., Inc., CAB No. P-70 (D.C.
CAB 1988). A discussion of these cases seriatim is helpful to the resolution of the
instant matter.

       In Forrester, the Board pointed out the important distinction between the
implications of the terms "responsive" and "responsible"" There it said, a bid that is
nonresponsive "is not curable after the bid is opened," whereas a "lack of bidder
respolJsibility is curable after the bids are opened." Most importantly, as Espina points
out, the Board also stated in Forrester at n.6 that:

       In light of the definition of "responsive bidder" in [the PPA] § 1-1181.7
       (41), merely stating that a requirement is a responsive matter will not
       suffice to make it so.       In all cases, the rationale underlying the
       responsiveness characterization must establish a "material" term to the
       invitation for bid.

This statement makes clear that the controlling test for de~termining whether a particular
provision relates to responsiveness is whether the provision establishes a material term
to the invitation for bid.~



  ~'The PPA definition of responsible bidder and responsive bidder is found at   §   1-1181.7
(40)(41) respectively and reads as follows:
                                         - 4 -


        The responsiveness/responsibility controversy in Forrester centered on a special
provision in the IFB which required the bidders (prime contractors) to include with their
bids a minority business enterprise (MBE) program providing for a minimum
participation of 49% of the total contract dollars by MBE subcontractors. Of particular
significance was the special provision's requirement that the minority subcontracting
firms be certified by the District as minority business enterprises at the time of bid
opening. The protester (Forrester) alleged that the bidder (McGaughan), whose bid it
was challenging, was non-responsive because one of the minority firms it included in its
bid list had not been certified at bid opening, thus causing the minority subcontracting
program to be in actuality less than the required 49% minimum at the time of bid
submission. The Board concluded that despite its finding that certain language used in
the special provision was at variance with the concept of responsibility, the special
provision related to responsibility and not responsiveness because it solicited information
bearing on a bidder's likely ability to meet the minimum minority subcontracting
participation requirement of 49%. The Board also concluded that insofar as it was
relevant to the protest, the material requirement of the invitation was that bidders
commit themselves to the MBE goals of the special provision. The Board held that
since McGaughan had committed itself to the MBE participation goals, its bid was not
nonresponsive because as it turned out, the MBE program submitted with the bid was
less than 49% of the totan contract dollars. McGaughan's; deficient MBE subcontracting
program was, we said, a correctable minor informality. ~ee Forrester at 82 and 86.

       In ZAV, the responsiveness/responsibility question concerned the List of Trades
provision in the invitation at issue. This provision stated that each bidder was required
to submit with its bid a listing of all trades to be utilized during the construction of the
project. The protester (ZAV) contended that even though it did not submit a list of
trades with its bid, the bid was responsive. The Board vitewed the listing requirement of
the List of Trades provision as being analogous to the subcontractor listing requirement
at issue in Forrester, supra. In reaching the conclusion that the District erred in
making the determination that ZAV's bid was nonresponsive for failure to supply a list
of trades with its bid, the Board made the following observation.

       In light of Forrester, it would seem apparent here that the IFB's list of
       trades requirement also relates to bidder responsibility. The Board finds
       that the only meaningful purpose the information requested by the List of
       Trades provision could serve would be to assist the procurement officials in
       assessing a bidder's ability to perform the contract work in accordance with



       (40) "Responsible bidder or offeror" means a person who has the capability
       in all respects to perform fully the contract requirements and the integrity
       and ability which will assure good faith performance.

       (41) " Responsive bidder" means a person who has submitted a bid which
       conforms in all material respects to the invitation for bids.
                                         - 5 -

      the material specifications. In addition, the Board finds that the List of
      Trades provision does not can for any information relating to the IFB
      specifications themselves or impose any legal obligations. The provision
      therefore is not a material one for purposes of [the PPA] § 1-1181.7(41).
      It is not clear what trades must be utilized in performing the contract but
      whatever they may be, ZAV must have them, and whether it does or does
      not is a question of bidder responsibility. Unquestionably, ZAV's mere
      failure to provide lthe list of trades with its bid does not say anything, one
      way or another, respecting its intention or promise to perform the contract
      in accordance with the IFB specifications. Thus, contrary to what PTI
      [intervenor] seems to assert, the Board does not see how ZAV's failure to
      submit the list of trades with its bid could have affected its obligation to
      perform the contract or the District's right to contract performance in
      accordance with the IFB specifications. The fact that the IFB states each
      bidder is required to submit the trade list with its bid is of no
      consequence, as such language is insufficient, in and of itself, to convert a .
      matter otherwise relating to responsibility to one going to responsiveness.
      See ZAV at 10 and 11.

       In Schlosser, the responsiveness/responsibility issue involved the provision in the
IFB that instructed bidders to submit with their bids, a pay item-by-pay item breakdown
of their total bid prices. The then current procurement regulations defined "material" for
responsiveness purposes to mean that which affects price, quantity, quality or delivery of
items offered. We concluded in Schlosser that:

      The bid price provision by calling for the bidders to quote a single firm,
      fixed price and thereby commit themselves to complete aU of the specified
      construction work at the quoted price, insofar as lis relevant here, reflects
      the material term of the IFB and not the ICC form which only requested
      that the bidders reiterate their bid price and provide a pay item breakdown
      of it. It therefore follows that since Len Parker's bid was not at variance
      with the bid price provision, it would have been improper for the District
      to have determined Len Parker's bid to be non-responsive merely because
      it failed to submit by the time of bid opening the information requested by
      the ICC form. Because the pay item amounts were not relevant to bid
      evaluation and their omission did not qualify to any extent Len Parker's
      bid price as stated in the bid price provision, the omission of the pay item
      amounts could be properly waived by the District as a minor informality.
      Accordingly, there is no legal merit to Schlosser's protest that Len Parker's
      bid was non-responsive for the reason alleged.
      See Schlosser at 9 and 10.

       We think it is clear from these three decisions of the Board that the "failure to
furnish" issue boils down to a question of whether the certification provision directing
bidders to furnish a DBE/WBE plan with their bids affects price, quantity, quality or
delivery of the items offered, [establishes a specification in the invitation or imposes any
                                         -   6 -

legal obligations.] The dear answer to this question is that it does none of these things.
By the expressed terms of the DBE/WBE certification form, when Espina signed and
submitted the form it legally obligated itself to perform the contract in a manner that
satisfied the specified DBE/WBE regulations and goals. The DBE/WBE plan would
therefore do no more than tell the District how a bidder proposed to meet its legal
obligation.lI The District, after examining the information, could then assess the
likelihood that the bidder would be able to satisfY the established DBE/WBE
participation goals. The PPA, § 1-1181.7(40), makes clear that information bearing on a
bidder's ability to perform relates to responsibility and not responsiveness.

       Although it causes us some discomfort, we do agree with the District that there
are other provisions in the IFB which support the conclusion that the requirement to
furnish a DBE/WBE plan at bid opening relates to responsibility. The first of these
provisions reads:

       All bidders are required to submit a written certification that they have
       read, understand and will comply with these requirements. A bidder's
       failure to submit this certification or submission of a false certification
       may render the bid non-responsive.

See the agency report, ExIl. No. 3A (Specifications), Appendix, DisadvantagedlWomen-
Owned Business Enterprilse Participation at 1. (Underlining original.)

       The second provision reads:

       This DBE/WBE Program must be submitted within five (5) days
       subsequent to the bid proposal. DBE/WBE certifi4~ations must be valid on
       the day of the bid opening. Any current apparent low responsible bidder
       must submit this DBE/WBE Program or the bid may be declared non-
       responsive.

Id. at 3. (Emphasis added.) While the DBE/WBE certification form provisions speak in
responsiveness terms (albeit improperly) the above-quoted proVIsIOns in the
specifications, in one case, speak in inclusive terms ("may render the bid non-responsive"
and in another case, they speak in responsibility terms ("must be submitted within five
(5) days subsequent to the bid proposals.") To say the least, the specifications are
inconsistent with the IFE: certification form regarding thc;~ matter of when the DBE/WBE
plan was to be furnished. For purposes of future procurements, this inconsistency
should be resolved.




 lIFor this reason, the District may wish to consider in the future asking only the bidder
which is being focused on for contract award (rather than an bidders) to submit the
DBE/WBE plan.
                                         -   7 -

       As we noted earlier, Espina did not furnish a DBE/WBE plan until after bid
opening. Thus, there is no question but that Espina's certification ("I win furnish with
my bid proposal a DBEf\VBE plan") is an erroneous statement. Faith would urge upon
us that under the fifth paragraph of the certification form, the erroneous statement is
sufficient to constitute a false certification for the purpose of rendering Espina's bid
non-responsive. We are of a different view. Considering, as we have already stated, that
the District improperly instructed the bidders to furnish DBE/WBE plans at bid opening,
the error, which is at the basis of the alleged false certification, was caused by the
District; and since Espina had nothing to do with the drafting of the certification form,
we see no reason for imputing the error to it. Mol"eovu, we are of the view that the
error that we speak of here is not the kind of error the false certification provision
contemplates as rendering a bid nonresponsive.

      We therefore find no basis to disturb the award to Espina since its bid was not
nonresponsive to the IFB.

                                        ORDER

       The protest is DENIED.


DATE: March 7, 1990
                                                   WILLIAM L. DAVIS
                                                   Chief Administrative Judge

CONCUR:



c~(}~C~~~ C\SOU\J(
CLAUDIA D. BOOKER
Administrative Judge



o/wj).fl~
DAVID H. MARLIN
Administrative Judge
