               GOVERNMENT OF THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA             ~~f'
                       CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD                             . . ~,
                                                                                            I/r.
PROTEST OF:                                     ) '.              1'('8, ..                    : /)
                                                )   "0<F- ....,               • ,')   ZQn
D. L. H. INDUSTRIES, INC.                       )       ""'.s-'  01 ffi,
                                                             .../:,.     0-
                                                                                      \7(19
                                                )                 ...'" ""'e,
UNDER IFB NO. 7392-AA-B9-0-7-HT                 )                     ~~...(<.I "'~'"
                                                                                  6'0:-      ~   ,



                                                                                                      r'
                                                                                       "'<9() . /


        MOTION TO DISMISS PROTEST; OR IN THE ALTERNATIVE I                                  '/,1,)'
               REPLY OF THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA                                                      '

     Pursuant to 27 DCMR 107.7, the respondent, District of

Columbia (the District), respectfully moves this Board to dismiss

the above-referenced case for lack of jurisdiction.                 In the

alternative, the District respectfully submits the following

Reply to the Comments on the Agency Report filed by the

protester, DLH Industries (DLH).      This Reply supplements the

Agency Report submitted by the District in this protest.



                            MOTION TO DISMISS



     In its Comments, DLH see]:s to have the Board review the

legality of the procedures used by MBOC to approve the DAS

decision to resolicit a cancelled sheltered market procurement in

the open market.    It is the position of the District that the

MBOC has exclusive authority to approve contracting agencies'

decisions regarding advertising in the open or the sheltered
                  r,
                                -2-



market and this Board does not have jurisdiction to hear matters
involving the procedures used by the MBOC to exercise that
authority.
      Where MBOC actions to certify companies as minority
business enterprises (MBEs) are concerned, this Board has held
that the bid protest procedure is not the proper vehicle for
seeking relief since the MBOC has exclusive authority under the
Minority contracting Act to decide matters regarding
certification.   See Protest of Abstracts, Inc., 1 P.D. 106 (D.C.
CAB 1987);   Aceves Construction & Maintenance Co., 1 P.D. 50
(D.C. CAB 1987); and Southern International Corporation, 1 P.D.
30 (D.C. CAB 1987).    In the same manner, the Minority Contracting
Act grants exclusive authority to the MBOC to review the plans of
contracting agencies to place contracts in the sheltered market.
See D.C. Code section 1-1149 (1987 Repl. Vol.).    Therefore, there
is no basis for review by this Board of the procedures used by
the MBOC in approving contracting agencies' decisions regarding
advertising in the open or the sheltered market.
     Additionally, if, as DLH argues, the MBOC's approval of the
DAS decision amounted to a contested case within the meaning of
the APA, the matter would not properly before this Board.    The
judicial review section of the APA provides for exclusive
jurisdiction over contested cases in the D.C. Court of Appeals.
See D.C. Code section 1-1510;    D.C. v. Douglass, 452 A.2d 329
(D.C. App. 1982) and Brenneman Assoc., Inc. v. D.C., 466 A.2d 459
(D.C. App. 1983).




                                                                      Ifs
                                 -3-



            Based on the above-stated arguments, the District
respectfully moves the Board to dismiss this protest for lack of
jurisdiction.


                                REPLY


        Even if the Board determines it has jurisdiction to hear
this protest, the legality of the MBOC's procedures in approving
the contracting agency's actions is not relevant to this
procurement.     As explained in the District's Agency Report, the
DAS contracting officer was given MBOC approval by the MBOC Staff
Director of the decision to procure in the open market as
required by MBOC regulations at 27 DCMR 604.9.     The contracting
officer was entitled to rely upon the representations of the
Staff Director that approval was being given on behalf of the
MBOC.     He was not required to look behind the representations of
the MBOC Staff Director.     Any protest of the District's actions
in placing this procurement in the open market should focus on
the narrow issue of whether the contracting agency acted in
compliance with the law.
        The District's position is that issues involving the
propriety of MBOC procedures are not relevant to the Board's
decisionmaking in this case since they concern matters involving
the activities of a separate District agency which were not
within the purview of the DAS procuring official.     The DAS
contracting officer had no influence on the MBOC's delegation of
decisionmaking to its Staff Director.     Nor was he involved in




                                                                      Nt,
                                 -4-



internal MBOC procedures in obtaining ratification of the Staff
Director's decision, documenting its decision or maintaining
records.   Further, the issue of whether DLH was entitled to a
hearing by the MBOC under the contested case provisions of the
District's Administrative Procedures Act (APA) or under the Fifth
Amendment of the   u.s. constitution would also not be relevant to
the determination of whether DAS acting properly in resoliciting
bread and bakery products in the open market.
     In the event that the Board determines that these matters
are properly before it, the District hereinafter addresses
several specific issues raised in DLH's comments:
     On Page 3 of its Comments, DLH argues that the procedural
requirements of the Minority Contracting Act and the APA do not
allow the Commissioners of the MBOC to delegate authority to the
MBOC Staff Director to approve a contracting officer's decision
to resolicit a procurement in the open market.    However, DLH
presents no legal authority to support its conclusions regarding
ministerial and discretionary duties.    Moreover, the Staff
Director's approval of the DAS decision was not a discretionary
duty since the MBOC regulations, at 27 DCMR 604.9, set standards
by which such approval would generally be granted.
     On page 4 of its comments, DLH alleges that the MBOC
Resolution, at Exhibit H of the District's Agency Report, does
not actually delegate authority to the Staff Director to approve
or disapprove a contracting agency's decisions regarding
resoliciting a formerly sheltered market procurement in the open
market.    DLH is relying upon its own interpretation of the text




                                                                     /91
                                  -5-



of the Resolution.    The legal principle applicable in this case,
which is often used by the courts in review of administrative
actions, is that great deference should be given to an agency's
own interpretation of its pronouncements.     See Allen v. Bergland,
661 F. 2d 1001 (4th Cir. 1981),     American Airlines, Inc. v. Sec.
of Labor, 578 F.2d 38 (2d Cir. 1978) and Charles v. Krauss Co.,
572 F. 2d 544 (5th cir. 1978), reh. denied 575 F. 2d 881.
Accordingly, the Board should give due consideration to the
MBOC's interpretation of its own Resolution, which is that it
authorizes the Staff Director to approve or disapprove a
contracting agency's decision regarding resoliciting a
procurement in the open or sheltered market.
     DLH's Comments erroneously assume that the Staff Director
reviewed the actual bid that DLH submitted to DAS in this
solicitation to determine whether it was excessive, as authorized
by section 6 of the Resolution.     However, in approving the DAS
decision, the MBOC Staff Director relied upon section 2 of the
Resolution, which authorizes the Staff Director to review the
procurement plans of District agencies and determine which
contracts are to be reserved for the sheltered market program.
DAS did not allege that DLH's bid was excessive and did not
submit the documentation required by MBOC regulations at 27 DCMR
604.10 to support such an allegation.     There was no need to do so
in this case since DLH's bid had already been rejected by the DAS
contracting officer as being nonresponsible and the solicitation
had been cancelled.    The MBOC was engaged in its own review of




                                                                       Jeff?
                                -6-



DLH's certification as an MBEl during this time due to complaints
it had received about the company but the MBOC did not review the
bid submitted by DLH in response to this IFB and did not
determine whether it was excessive.
     On page 7 of its Comments, DLH states that the Commissioners
of the MBOC failed to ratify the Staff Director's approval of the
DAS decision to advertise in the open market.   The minutes of the
August, 1987 MBOC meeting which DLH attached to its Comments
indicate the entire Commission was informed of the decision and
DLH's protest in this matter.   Express approval of the Staff
Director's approval of the DAS decision was not required.   The
fact that the Commissioners were made aware of the matter and
raised no objections indicates approval of the Staff Director's
course of action.
     DLH's Comments also allege that the Minority contracting Act
grants a property interest in the sheltered market program to DLH
as a minority business enterprises.   First, DLH had no property
interest in having this procurement placed the sheltered market
since it had no property interest in award of this contract.      The
D.C. Court of Appeals has held that unsuccessful bidders on a
contract have no property interest in that contract for which due




1    The Minority Contracting Act authorizes revocation of
certifications and grants the right to a contested hearing in
those proceedings. See D.C. Code section 1-1148 (c). MBOC
regulations set forth procedures for periodic compliance reviews
of certified MBEts for which informal preliminary hearings may be
held as well as formal trial-type hearing procedures. See 27
DCMR sections 705 -708.




                                                                        NY
                     .-..--
                                  -7-



process requires a hearing prior to contract award.     See Network
Technical Services v. D. C. Data et al., 464 A. 2d 133 (D.C. App.
1983) •
          Further, The District's sheltered market program does not
give DLH or other MBE's a right to have a procurement placed in
the sheltered market since it does not require that contracting
agencies place any particular procurement in either market,
either initially or upon resolicitation.      The sheltered market
program, as set forth in      Minority contracting Act and MBOC
regulations, only sets goals for MBE participation in District
contracting and requires that contracting agencies establish
programs for allocating a percentage of its yearly number of
contracts for procurement in the sheltered market.      See   D.C.
Code sections 1-1146 and 1-1147 (1987 Repl. Vol.) and 27 DCMR
sections 602 & 604.
      Moreover, DLH was not deprived of an opportunity to
participate in the District's sheltered market program by the DAS
decision to resolicit this procurement in the open market.        DLH's
certification as an MBE was not affected by that determination so
it could continue to submit bids on sheltered market
solicitations.
      In arguing that it has a liberty interest for which due
process requires a full hearing, DLH's Comments allege that MBOC
approval of the DAS decision was based on an MBOC determination
regarding DLH's capability of performing the contract or on the
acceptability of DLH's bid.      To the contrary, as stated above,
the MBOC did not review DLH's bid submitted to DAS under this




                                                                          1M)
                  -~.-..

                                    -8-



solicitation.    The MBOC did not make a determination regarding
DLH's capability to perform this contract.       Rather, DLH is
referring to the concept of "responsibility" under District law. 2
DLH's inability to perform, i.e. nonresponsibility, was
determined by the DAS contracting officer during the normal
solicitation review process.       See Exhibit E to the District's
Agency Report.    The DAS contracting officer was required to
reject DLH's bid since a contract can only be awarded to a
responsible bidder.        See D.C. Code Sections 1-1183.3(e) and 1-
1183.4(f) .
      MBOC neither participated in nor reviewed the decision of
the DAS contracting officer regarding DLH's ability to perform
the contract.    After the DAS contracting officer found that DLH,
the only bidder, was not responsible, he cancelled the
solicitation. The MBOC's involvement came after those decisions
were made and was limited to reviewing the DAS decision to
resolicit the procurement in the open market.        There was no
fact finding to be made by MBOC in this matter so no testimony of
witnesses or other presentations of evidence were necessary.




2
     The Procurement Practices Act at section 1-1181.7 (40)
defines a responsible bidder or offeror as one who has the
capability to perform the contract requirements. DAS procurement
procedures require that bidders affirmatively demonstrate
responsibility to DAS contracting officials. See Materiels
Management Manual section 2641.11 (B) (8). DLH was unable to do
so.




                                                                       11'1/
                                              ",
                                  -9-



Therefore, a hearing was not required.
     Based upon the above, the District respectfully requests the
Board to deny this bid protest.


                              Respectfully submitted,


                                   ~Q~Q~.caudi~
                                                        d/v---
                                          n
                                         orporation Counsel, D.C.




                                                                    "J. 0'il
"'-
                           ~-,

                                          -10-




                                 CERTIFICATE OF SERVICE

             I hereby certify that a copy of the foregoing Reply of the
      District of Columbia was mailed, first class, postage prepaid, on
      this   10 v.(   day of February, 1988 to the following:



                                                                        D.C.

      William L. England, Jr., Esquire             Graham Davis
      Brooks & England                             General Manager
      4801 Massachusetts Avenue, N.W.              Continental Baking Co.
      Suite 400                                    2301 Georgia Ave., N.W.
      Washington, D.C. 20016                       Washington, D.C. 20001

      Woodrow W. Stoddard, Controller              Charles G. Wheatly
      Capital Bakers, Division                     Vice President
      Stroehmann Bakeries, Inc.                    H & S Bakery, Inc.
      3996 Paxton Street                           603 S. Bond st.
      Harrisburg, PA. 17111                        Baltimore, Maryland 21231

      Charles Coleman
      Enterprises of Decatur, Inc.
      4730 14th st., N.W.
      Washington, D.C. 20011




                                                                               ; ; 0 :2,
