                                  DCR. Vol. 38 No. 20 05-17-1991
                                                                                      MAY 1 7 1911




                  GOVERNMENT OF THE DISTRICf OF COLUMBIA
                         CONTRACf APPEALS BOARD


 PROTEST OF:

     CfA MANAGEMENT GROUP, INC.                    )
                                                   )               CAB No. P-71
     Under RFP No. CF-004-87                       )


    For the protester: Charlotte Taylor, President.            For the Government: Howard
 Schwartz, Assistant Corporation Counsel, D.C.

    Opinion by Administrative Judge Marlin with Administrative Judges Booker and
Davis concurring.


                                    BACKGROUND

    CTA Management Group, Inc. (CTA), filed this protest!' with the Board on October
12, 1987, challenging the evaluation rating ot the proposal it submitted in response to
Request tor Proposals No. CF-0004-87 (RFP). The Department ot Employment Services
(DOES) issued the subject RFP on June 15, 1987, seeking proposals from organizations
reprding work training programs tor District residents under the District ot Columbia
Youth Employment Act ot 1979 (YEA). The RFP closed on July 6, 1987, and twelve
proposals, Including that of erA, were received. ~ Agency Report at 2.

    'lbe RFP set out the criteria by which the proposals were to be evaluated. A list ot
facton, each followed by a numerical value for maximum points available, was designated.
The maluation criteria included the tollowinc: Technical Review-possible 45 points; Past
Perfonnance-posslble 40 points; Cost Review-possible 15 points; Performance Based
Subgranu-pos.ible 10 points. ~ at 3 and em. A.



  J/ 'lbt. c:ue originated during a period or time when the District or Columbia Contract
Appeal. Board wa. tonctioning punuant to Commissioner'. Orpnlzatloa Order No. 9,
D.C. Code, Supplement V (1978), as amended by Mayor'. Order 8l-214, 30 DCR 497
(January 28, 1983). Punuant to the District of Columbia Procurement Practices Act or
1985, D.C. Code • 1-U89.1, a new independent agency denominated as the Contract
Appeal. Board was created. This new Board became operational on Augu.t 1, 1988, and
.ucceeded to Jurisdiction or all contract di.pute cases pendtnc before the previou.ly
establl.hed Board.



                                      2935
                                DCR. Vol. 38 No. 20 05-17-1991

                                                                                      Mi-\1 1 7 1991
                                                                                                       I
                                              -2-
     A committee of five DOES officials evaluated each proposal. erA received a rating
 of 71.7 points. This score was based on the following break-down of points: Program
 Review-41.7 points; Cost Review--15 points; Past Perfonnance--15 points; Perfonnance-
 Based Subgrant Preference--O points. Id. at 3.

      The twelve proposals were tben ranked according to total points received, tbe proposal
 receiving the bighest rating being ranked as number one and that scoring tbe lowest points            t
                                                                                                       r
 as number twelve. erA's proposal was ranked as number eleven. Id. at 4.

      Awards were made based on availability of funds for tbe program. Award was made
 to the first ranked offeror, tben to tbe second ranked and so on until program funds were
 depleted. erA did not receive an award as the available funds were exhausted after
 contracts were awarded to tbe top ten rAnked offerors. Id. at 4. The ten awards were all
 made by October 1, 1987. Id. at 5. On October 8, 1987, erA received a letter from
 DOES indicating that erA had not received an award. Protest Letter at 1.


                                     CI'A'S PROTEST

     erA's protest of its evaluation score focuses on one specific item, tbe rating it
received for its past perfonnance. erA alleges that the DOES failed to properly evaluate
its perfonnance under a previous contract witb the department.1I In support of this
allegation, CfA states that tbe evaluation committee judged erA to have fallen sbort in
tbe number of participants it placed in un subsidized employment under tbe previous
contract .but did not take into consideration .tbat erA still had another three months to
perfonn under tbat contract at the time of evaluation and that its contract was for a ten-
montb period, not a twelve-montb period. Protest Letter at 1.

     In its protest letter, erA also contends tbat consideration was not given to tbe
detrimental effect on tbe project of tbe DOES' loss of an initial job referrals list which,
argues erA, had caused virtually no participants to be referred to its project until late
March. Id. at 1.

     CfA also contends tbat in the evaluation of its past perfonnance, consideration was
not given to the fact that DOES, under its previous contract, had railed to assign CfA an
effective contract manager until late February, two and one-balf montbs after the contract
was siped. Id. at 2.




 11 The evaluation was based on erA's perfonnance under Contract No. ELL-I90 whicb
was necuted on Dec. 1, 1987 and was to expire on Sept. 30, 1987.                  .



                                       2936
                                                                                                       I
                                      DCR. Vol. 38 No. 20 05-17-1991

                                                                                             MM 1 7 l~J



                                                 -3 -
                                  THE DISTRIcrS RESPONSE

        In Its Aaency Report filed with the Board on March 7, 1'88, the District argues that
    CTA's protest is without merit. Regarding CTA's contention that the DOES' evaluation
    was defective In that It railed to take Into consideration the ract that CTA stm had three
    more months to perform under the contract and that Its previous contract was lor only
    a ten-month period, the District araues that, In order to Insure continuity 01 services,
    proposals must be sought and award must be made prior to the expiration 01 existing
    contracts. Therefore, It was not possible to wait until CTA had completed performance
    under contract ELL-I,., evaluation had to be based only on the performance Cl'A had
    rendered as of July 1'87.

         Cl'A's second contention, that the evaluation committee did not make note of the
    impact on CTA's performance of DOES' loss of a referral list, is also meritless, argues the
    District. According to an Exit Interview summary for the month of February, 1987, which
    DOES and CTA omcials both signed, the CTA project was not scheduled to enroll
    participants until March, 1987. Agency Report, exh. E. In addition, the Exit Interview
    for March, 1'87, states:

r       •.. According to the Contractor, there was, brieRy, a problem in locating some
        Job-orders that apparently were submitted and missing. • •. They [the job-orders]
        were expedited the moment that they were located and the contractor is now 340%
        ahead 01 planned enrollment. [Agency Report, exh. H.]

         The District argues that these statements, signed by a· Cl'A omcial, indicate- that Cl'A
    itself had conceded that the loss or the rererral list had no significant adverse effect on
    CTA's performance under its previous contract.

         The District also points out that the ExIt Interview forms Cl'A signed for January and
    February, 1'87, listed numerous activities that were accomplished by Cl'A during those
    months. CI'A did not indicate in the Exit Interview lorms lor January or February, 1'87,
    that its program progress was unsatisfactory or that lack 01 a contract manager was
    detrimental to its program. Therefore, the District contends, there is no factual basis ror
    the conclusion that the lack or a contract manager until February 1'87 adversely affected
    Cl'A's performance. Agency Report at 8.


                                             OPINION

        In our decision of the protest of Pinnacle Corp. (D.C. CAB, Nov. 18, 1'88; J6 D.C.
    Reg. 3965, June Z, 198'), we noted that the Procurement Practices Act 011'85 (PPA)
    confers on this Board jurisdiction to hear and decide all protests on a de rum! basis.
    Based on the language of the PPA, all that is required for a protester to prevail in its




                                            2937
vHtl'ict ot Columbia Register             DCR. Vol. 38 No. 20 05-17-1991
                                                                                             MAY 11 1991


                                                        -4-
          claim is that it demonstrate, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the District hal
          committed a material violation of an applicable law, regulation or term or condition of
          a solicitation. Pinnacle at 6.

              This standard of review dillers sharply from the standard exercised by the General
          Accounting Office (GAO) in its review of protest cases. GAO requires a protester to show
          tbat tbe challenged agency action or decision was arbitrary, unreasonable or an abuse of
          discretion. 'There is a presumption of agency correctness and the GAO limits its role to
          examining "whether tbe agency's evaluation was fair and reasonable and consistent with
          tbe stated evaluation criteria." The City of S~rtanbul'l' B-1l4161, November 2, 1984, 84-
          1 CPD, 487.

              Botb tbis Board and the General Services Board of Contract Appeals (GSBCA), on
          tbe otber hand, have de ru!m review autbority. See 41 U.S.C. § 60S (a) (1982) for GSA's
          authority. Both boards impose upon a protester tbe burden of establishing the
          adjudicative facts in support of its case by a preponderance of the relevant evidence. 'The
          presumption of agency correctness is not permitted.

               In the instant case, the protester is challenging discretionary judgments in evaluatiq
          proposals. Our standard is whether the actions of the contracting agency are clearly
          defective. We will "grant deference to the agency's technical judgment but...will not
          slavishly follow it," an approach consistent with that of the GSBCA. International
          Systems Marketing, Inc., GSBCA No. 7~P, 85-3 BCA , 18,196 (1985).

              In this protest, the Protester does not allege that the contracting agency deviated from
         the evaluation criteria set out in the RFP. Instead, erA alleges that the reviewing
         committee's evaluation was unreasonable as it failed to consider various factors in
         assessing the Protester's past experience. Our analysis follows.

              (1) Protester's first allegation is that erA was prejudiced by not having its tull (10)
         ten-month performance evaluated. The District admits that only seven months of
         performance were appraised but correctly contends that the RFP's schedule was necessary
         in order to solicit new proposals before the expiration of the preceding contracts.

              In soliciting services, such as the job-training program involved in this protest, it is
         often necessary to solicit new contract proposals to insure the continuity of ORlGing
         programs. This RFP was designed to continue work training programs for District youth
         without interruption. It was not possible to tailor the RFP requirements to ftt erA's
         particular contracting history.

            When the evaluation was conducted, the committee reviewed all performance data
        available. DOES has provided documentation indicating how erA'. perfOI'lll8DCle under
        the previous contract was reviewed. According to these documents, the evaluating




                                                                                                           I
                                                  2938
 ·       rict ot Columb1a Register             DCR. Vol. 38 No. 20 05-17-1991
LJ1S ~                                                                                            MAY 171991



                                                           -5-
              committee compared the number of program participants CfA had successfully placed in
              jobs to the program goal number. The statistics employed show that while CfA's contract
              period was 70% completed, only one program participant had been placed in unsubsidized
              employment. This one participant represented approximately 3% of the project figure
              goal. Although CfA still had three months to complete its contract, the evaluating
              committee gave CfA a low performance rating, reasoning that a 3% placement rate at a
              point in time when 70% of the contract period had already expired did not constitute
              satisfactory performance.

                 The Board finds that the committee acted reasonably in conducting its evaluation in
             that it took into consideration all information regarding CfA's past performance that was
             available at the time the evaluation was carried out.                                .

                 (2) CfA's second contention is that the DOES evaluating committee did not take into
             consideration the detrimental effect upon CfA's past performance caused by the loss of
             a job referral list by DOES. CfA argues that this caused a delay in its receipt of
             enrollments. However, according to records supplied by DOES, no enrollments were
             actually scheduled for CfA's program until March, 1987. In the monthly interview for
             February 1987, signed by both DOES and CfA representatives, it is indicated that CfA's
             program was not scheduled to enroll participants until March, 1987.

                  Also, the yearly program planning calendar indicates that CfA was scheduled to have
             ten participants enrolled in March, 1987. In March, 1987, CfA actually received thirty-
             four enrollments. This was far in excess of those tentatively scheduled. Based on the fact
             that CfA received more enrollments for the month than were originally anticipated, its
             allegation that the loss of a referral list caused it to not receive participants is factually
             groundless. The Board therefore must find that the DOES was reasonable in not taking
             into account the "detrimental" effects of the loss of a list where there was no evidence to
             indicate such detrimental effects actually resulted.

                  (3) CfA's final contention is that the lack of a contract manager until February,
             1987, adversely affected its performance under the previous contract. While it is possible
             that CfA's lack of a DOES contract manager could have adversely affected CfA's
             performance, CfA has offered no evidence to support this allegation. DOES has, however,
             submitted CfA's monthly reports for January and February, 1987, which list ' several
             activities that were completed by CfA in those months. Absent any evidence to the
             contrary, it does not appear that the lack of a contract manager hindered CfA's
             performance and the DOES evaluation committee acted reasonably when it did not take
             special consideration of this fact in evaluating CfA's past performance.

                 The Board finds that DOES acted reasonably in evaluating CfA's past co~tract
             performance. CfA has failed to offer any evidence to document its allegations, while, in




                                                       2939
                              DCR. Vol. 38 No. 20 05-17-1991                                            f
                                                                                      ~.;;(   1 7 1~1
                                                                                                  ~
                                                                                                        ,   D

                                                                                                        ~
                                             -, -
response to eadI of erA's aUegations, DOES bas produced documentary evidence
demonstratiq that it bad a reasonable basis for its evaluation ntiDg.

     For the forecoiq reasons, it is

    ORDERED, that the protest is DENIED.


DA~ __~J~u=ne~'L,~l98~'____                                     ~/d,~
                                                               DAVID H. MARLIN
                                                               Administrative Judge




CONCUR:


 e;J aw:f{d'1S~ ~
CLAUDIA D. BOOKER
AdmiDistratift Judge



L!~/J~
WILLIAM L DAVIS
Chief Administrative Judge




                                        2940
