           QJ)oucrmlll.'nt of tbe IDil'itrict of (!ll1hul1biu
                        CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD
                          III' E STREET, N W   SUITE 300

                           WASHINGTON     0    C   20004



                                                           12021727-6597




                                June 9, 1989


TO:         Charlotte Taylor, President
            CTA Managements Group, Inc.
            806 15th Street, N.W., Suite 421
            Washington, D.C.  20005

            Howard S. Schwartz, Assistant Corporation
              Counsel, D.C.
            Department of Administrative Services
            613 G Street, N.W., Room 916
            Washington, D.C.  20001


SUBJECT:    CAB No. P-71, Protest of CTA Managements Group, Inc.



      Enclosed is a copy of the Board's opinion in the
 above-referenced case.


                      &7k~
                       ROSE M. GILLISON
                       Clerk to the Board




Enc.
                GOVERNMENT OF THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA
                       CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD


PROTEST OF:

   CTA MANAGEMENT GROUP, INC.                  )
                                               )             CAB No. P-7l
    Under RFP No. CF-004-87                    )


   For the protester: Charlotte Taylor, President.       For the Government: Howard
Schwartz, Assistant Corporation Counsel, D.C.

    Opinion by Administrative Judge Marlin with Administrative Judges Booker and
Davis concurring.


                                    BACKGROUND

    CTA Management Group, Inc. (CTA), filed this protest!! with the Board on October
22, 1987, challenging the evaluation rating of the proposal it submitted in response to
Request for Proposals No. CF-0004-87 (RFP). The Department of Employment Services
(DOES) issued the subject RFP on June 15, 1987, seeking proposals from organizations
regarding work training programs for District residents under the District of Columbia
Youth Employment Act of 1979 (YEA). The RFP closed on July 6, 1987, and twelve
proposals, including that of CTA, were received. See Agency Report at 2.

     The RFP set out the criteria by which the proposals were to be evaluated. A list of
factors, each followed by a numerical value for maximum points available, was designated.
The evaluation criteria included the following: Technical Review--possible 45 points; Past
Performance--possible 40 points; Cost Review--possible 15 points; Performance Based
Subgrants--possible 10 points. Id. at 3 and exh. A.



 !I This case originated during a period of time when the District of Columbia Contract
Appeals Board was functioning pursllaut to Commissioner's Organization Order No.9,
D.C. Code, Supplement V (1978), as amended by Mayor's Order 82-224, 30 DCR 497
(January 28, 1983). Pursuant to the District of Columbia Procllrement Practices Act of
1985, D.C. Code § 1-1189.1, a new independent agency denominated as the Contract
Appeals Board was created. This new Board became IIperational on August 1, 1988, and
succeeded to jllrisdiction of all coutract dispute cases pending before the previously
established Board.
                                          -2-

    A committee of five DOES officials evaluated each proposal. CTA received a rating
of 71.7 points. This score was based on the following break-down of points: Program
Review--41.7 points; Cost Review--15 points; Past Performance--15 points; Performance-
Based Subgrant Preference--O points. Id. at 3.

    The twelve proposals were then ranked according to total points received, the proposal
receiving the highest rating being ranked as number one and that scoring the lowest points
as number twelve. CTA's proposal was ranked as number eleven. Id. at 4.

     Awards were made based on availability of funds for the program. Award was made
to the first ranked offeror, then to the second ranked and so on until program funds were
depleted. CTA did not receive an award as the available funds were exhausted after
contracts were awarded to the top ten ranked offerors. Id. at 4. The ten awards were all
made by October 1, 1987. Id. at 5. On October 8, 1987, CTA received a letter from
DOES indicating that CTA had not received an award. Protest Letter at 1.


                                    CfA'S PROTEST

     CTA's protest of its evaluation score focuses on one specific item, the rating it
received for its past performance. CTA alleges that the DOES failed to properly evaluate
its performance under a previous contract with the department.Y In support of this
allegation, CTA states that the evaluation committee judged CTA to have fallen short in
the number of participants it placed in unsubsidized employment under the previous
contract but did not take into consideration that CTA still had another three months to
perform under that contract at the time of evaluation and that its contract was for a ten-
month period, not a twelve-month period. Protest Letter at 1.

    In its protest letter, CTA also contends that consideration was not given to the
detrimental effect on the project of the DOES' loss of an initial job referrals list which,
argues CTA, had caused virtually no participants to be referred to its project until late
March. Id. at 1.

     CTA also contends that in the evaluatiou of its past performance, consideration was
not given to the fact that DOES, under its previous contract, had failed to assign CTA an
effective contract manager until late February, two and one-half months after the contract
was signed. Id. at 2.




 Y The evaluation was based on CTA's performance under Contract No. ELL-190 which
was executed on Dec. 1, 1987 and was to expire on Sept. 30, 1987.
                                           -3-

                             THE DISTRICT'S RESPONSE

    In its Agency Report filed with the Board Oil March 7, 1988, the District argues that
CTA's protest is without merit. Regarding CTA's contention that the DOES' evaluation
was defective in that it failed to take into consideration the fact that CTA still had three
more months to perform IInder the contract and that its previolls contract was for only
a ten-month period, the District argiles that, in order to insure contilmity of services,
proposals must be sought and award must be made prior to the expiration of existing
contracts. Therefore, it was not possible to wait until CTA had completed performance
under contract ELL-190; evaluation bad to be based only on the performance CTA had
rendered as of July 1987.

    CTA's second contention, that the evaluation committee did not make note of the
impact on CTA's performance of DOES' loss of a referral list, is also meritless, argnes tlie
District. According to an Exit Interview summary for the month of February, 1987, which
DOES and eTA officials both signed, the CTA project was not scheduled to enmll
participants until March, 1987. Agency Report, exli. E. In addition, the Exit Interview
for March, 1987, states:

    ... According to the Contractor, there was, briefly, a problem in locating some
    job-orders that apparently were submitted and missing.... They [the job-orders]
    were expedited the moment that they were located and the contractor is now 340%
    ahead of planned enrollment. [Agency Report, exh. n.]

     The District argues that these statements, signed by a CTA official, indicate that CTA
itself had conceded that the loss of the referral list had no significant adverse effect Oil
CTA's performance under its previolls contract.

    The District also points out that the Exit Interview forms CTA signed for January and
February, 1987, listed numerous activities that were accomplished by CTA during those
months. CTA did not indicate ill the Exit Interview forms for January or February, 1987,
that its program progress was unsatisfactory or that lack of a contract manager was
detrimental to its program. Therefore, the District contends, there is no factual basis for
the conclusion that the lack of a contract manager until February 1987 adversely affected
CTA's performance. Agency Report at 8.


                                         OPINION

     In 0111' decisioll of the protest of Pinnacle Corp. (D.C. CAB, Nov. 18, 1988; 36 D.C.
 Reg. 3965, Jllne 2, 1989), we noted that the Procurement Practices Act of 1985 (PPA)
 confers on this Board jurisdiction to bear and decide all protests Oil a de novo basis.
 Based on the language of the PPA, all that is required for a protester to prevail in its
                                            ·4·
claim is that it demollstrate, by a preponderance of the evidellce, that the District has
committed a material violatioll of an applicable law, reglliation or term or condition of
a solicitation. Pinllllcle at 6.

     This standard of review differs sharply from the standard exercised by the General
Acconlltillg Office (GAO) ill its review of protest cases. GAO reqllires a protester to show
tllat the challellged agency action or decision was arbitrary, IlIIreasonable or lUi abllse of
discretion. There is a presumption of agency correctness and the GAO limits its mle to
examining "whether the agency's evaluation was fair and reasonable and consistent with
the stated evaluation criteria." The City of Spartallburg. B·214161, November 2, 1984, 84·
2 CPD! 487.

    Both this Board alld tlie General Services Board of COli tract Appeals (GSBCA), Oil
the other halld, have de IlOVO review authority. See 41 V.S.c. § 605 (a) (1982) for GSA's
authority. Both boards impose upon a protester the burden of establishing the
adjudicative facts ill support of its case by a preponderallce of the relevant evidellce. The
presllmption of agellCY correctness is not permitted.

    In the instant case, the protester is challellgillg discretionary judgments in evaluating
proposals. Our standard is whether the actiolls of the cOlltracting agency are clearly
defective. We will "grant deference to the agellCY's techllical judgment buL.wili not
slavishly follow it," an approacli consistellt with that of tlie GSBCA. International
Systems Marketing, Inc., GSBCA No. 7948.1', 85·3 RCA 1! 18,196 (1985).

     In this protest, the Protester does not allege that the cOlltracting agency deviated from
tile evaillatioll criteria set out ill tile RFP. Instead, CTA alleges tliat the reviewing
committee's evaluation was unreasonahlle as it failed to cOllsider various factors in
assessillg the Protester's past experiellce. Our analysis follows.

    (1) Protester's first allegatioll is that eTA was prejudiced by not havillg its full (HI)
ten·month performance evaluated. The District admits tilat only seven lIIonths of
performance were appraised but correctly contends that the RFP's sclJedllle was Ilecessary
in order to solicit Ilew proposals before the expiration of the precedillg contracts.

     In soliciting services, sneh as the job· training program involved in this protest, it is
often necessary to solicit Ilew contract proposals to insllre the continuity of ongoing
programs. This RFP was designed to cOlltinue work tl'llinillg programs for District youth
without illterruption. it was not possible to tailor the RJi'P requirements to fit CTA's
particular cOlltractiug history.

    When the evaluation was cOllducted, tile committee reviewed all performance data
available. DOES has provided documentatioll indicating 1I0w CTA's performance !llldcr
the previous COil tract was reviewed. According to these documents, tile evaluatillg
                                            -5-

committee compared the number of program participants eTA had successfully placed in
jobs to the program goal number. The statistics employed show that while eTA's contract
period was 70% completed, only one program participant had been placed in unsubsidized
employment. This one participant represented approximately 3% of the project figure
goal. Although eTA still had three months to complete its contract, the evaluating
committee gave eTA a low performance rating, reasoning that a 3% placement rate at a
point in time when 70% of the contract period had already expired did not constitute
 satisfactory performance.

    The Board finds that the committee acted reasonably in conducting its evaluation in
that it took into consideration all information regarding eTA's past performance that was
available at the time the evaluation was carried out.

    (2) eTA's second contention is that the DOES evaluating committee did not take into
consideration the detrimental effect upon eTA's past performance caused by the loss of
a job referral list by DOES. eTA argues that this caused a delay in its receipt of
enrollments. However, according to records supplied by DOES, no enrollments were
actually scheduled for eTA's program until March, 1987. In the monthly interview for
February 1987, signed by both DOES and eTA representatives, it is indicated that eTA's
program was not scheduled to enroll participants uutil March, 1987.

    Also, the yearly program planning calendar indicates that eTA was scheduled to have
ten participants enrolled in March, 1987. In March, 1987, eTA actually received thirty-
four enrollments. This was far in excess of those tentatively scheduled. Based on the fact
that eTA received more enrollments for the month than were originally anticipated, its
allegation that the loss of a referral list caused it to not receive participants is factually
groundless. The Board therefore mllst find that the DOES was reasonable in not taking
into account the "detrimental" effects of the loss of a list where there was no evidence to
indicate such detrimental effects actually resulted.

     (3) eTA's final contention is that the lack of a contract manager until February,
1987, adversely affected its performance under the previous contract. While it is possible
that eTA's lack of a DOES contract manager could have adversely affected eTA's
performance, eTA has offered no evidence to support this allegation_ DOES has, however,
submitted eTA's monthly reports for January and February, 1987, which list several
activities that were completed by eTA in those months. Absent any evidence to the
contrary, it does not appear that the lack of a contract manager hindered eTA's
performance and the DOES evaluation committee acted reasonably when it did not take
special consideration of this fact in evaluating eTA's past performance.

     The Board finds that DOES acted reasonably in evaluating eTA's past contract
 performance. eTA has failed to offer any evidence to document its allegations, while, in
                                                 -6•

response to each of CTA's allegations, DOES has produced documentary evidence
demonstrating that it had a reasonable basis for its evaluation rating.

      For the foregoing reasons, it is

      ORDERED, that the protest is DENIED.


DATE:_-->d.J",u...
               ne,,-,,-9,,-,1,,-,9:.>:S,,-9_ _          fu /,J,
                                                       DAVID H. MARLIN
                                                                              f11ev>!L
                                                       Administrative Judge




CONCUR:


 (J at (Aid 'iSo.:,lcQ2
CLAUDIA D. BOOKER
Administrative Judge




WILLIAM L. DAVIS
Chief Administrative Judge
