           <&ouernment of tl1e IDilitrict of illolumbia
                      CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD
                        1111 E STREET   N W   SUITE 300

                         WASHINGTON      0    C   20004



                                                              (202 ) 7276597




                         April 25, 1989


TO:        Mr. Vincent J. Hodge
           5768 Oakland Blvd.
           Roanoke, VA 24019
           Howard S. Schwartz, Assistant Corporation
             Counsel, D.C.
           Department of Administrative Services
           613 G Street, N.W. Room 916
           Washington, D.C. 20001


SUBJECT:   CAB No. P-138, Protest of Simon Ladder Towers, Inc .


      Enclosed is                           in the
 above-referenced ~a~~PY of the " £ n i o n


                    ~7bIL±SON
                     Clerk to the Board
                                                          '




Enc.
                 GOVERNMENT OF THE DISTRICl' OF COLUMBIA
                         CONTRACl' APPEAlS BOARD

PROTEST OF:
     SIMON IADDER TOWERS, INC.
                                               CAB   No. P-138
     Under IFB No. 8241-AA-42-0-8-AG

    For the Protester: Vincent J. Hodge. For the Government: Howard S.
Schwartz, Assistant corporation Counsel.
    Opinion by Administrative Judge Claudia               D.    Booker   with
Administrative Judges Davis and Marlin concurring.

                                 OPINION
     On April 5, 1988, the Department of Administrative Services (DAS)
issued Invitation for Bids No.     8241-AA-42-0-8-AG    (IFB)   to obtain an
aerial ladder platform truck to be used by the D.C. Fire Department.      See
the District of Columbia's Motion to Dismiss filed with the Board on
November 22, 1988.   On May 5, 1988, at the formal bid opening DAS opened
the four bids it had received •
              •
     On September 9, 1988, Simon Ladder Towers, Inc.      (Simon-LTI), filed
this protest with the Board challenging the pending award of the contract
to Grumman Emergency Products    (Grumman) because Grumman,      like all the
other bidders, had taken exceptions to the IFB.1       Simon-LTI argues that
its bid price was the lowest submitted and requested that the contract be
awarded to it.


     1 Simon-LTI' s reference to the "pending award" to Grumman implies
that there had been some indication from DAS that Grumman was to be
awarded the contract; however, the protester has offered no information
as to its basis for this belief.     The record in this case reveals no
evidence that Grumman, which was the highest bidder, was first in line
for award; therefore, it is unclear why Simon-LTI frames its protest in
terms of a challenge to a pending award to Grumman.
                                      - 2 -

      At the time the protest was filed the DAS had not completed its
evaluation of the bids .      However, once DAS completed its evaluation of
the   bids,   on   November   21,   1988,    DAS   rejected    all    the    bids    for
nonresponsiveness and cancelled the IFB because all of the bids had
failed to conform to the essential requirements of the IFB.
      In its Motion to Dismiss the District argues that the Board is
without jurisdiction to hear and decide this protest on its merits
because the protest is premature.           The District contends that because
this protest was filed prior to the award of the contract, the protest is
speCUlative as it is based on the possibility of a future award of a
contract and, therefore, the protester was not aggrieved at the time the
protest was filed.    In addition, the District argues, the protest is moot
because the IFB was cancelled. 2
      The position of the District is well taken.
      The Board has stated in Systems Products. Inc., CAB No. P-88                  at 2
(D.C. C.A.B. January 31, 1989):
      "Systems has failed to show that it is an aggrieved party. The
      mere submission of a nonresponsive bid by Grey does not have an
      injurious action adverse to Systems or any other bidder.     No
      official agency action adverse to Systems has been taken.
      Absent such action, this protest is speculative and premature."
      In this present protest the District did not take any official
action adverse to the protester until              November   21,    1988,   when the
District rejected Simon-LTI's bid along with the other bids and cancelled


     2 The District does not include a statement of facts section in its
Motion to Dismiss and fails to provide the Board with sufficient factual
information upon which the Board can determine all of the relevant facts
to this protest. Pursuant to Board rule 107.3, the District is required
to include in any dispositive motion a brief statement of facts on which
the motion is based or the reasons for the relief sought.
                                         - 3 -

the IFB.     At that point in time Simon-LTI became aggrieved and if it had
chosen to protest the agency's rejection of its bid as nonresponsive, or
the decision to cancel the IFB, Simon-LTI should have done so at that
time.
        Simon-LTI   has   failed   to   show that   it    is   an   aggrieved party.
Therefore, the Board lacks the requisite jurisdiction to hear and decide
this protest.
        Because the Board is without jurisdiction to hear and decide the
merits of this protest,        it will not decide the issue of whether the
District's cancellation of the IFB causes this protest to be moot.
        Accordingly, the District's Motion to Dismiss is granted and this
protest is dismissed for lack of jurisdiction.

                                         ORDER

        The protest is dismissed.


DATE:      April 25, 1989
                                                         CLAUDIA D. BOOKER
                                                         Administrative Judge



CONCUR:




~~N~
Administrative Judge




WILLIAM L. DAVIS
Chief Administrative Judge
