•



                    GOVERNMENT OF THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA
                           CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD


    PROTEST OF:

          NASHIBOYD                                              )
                                                                 ) CAB No. P-128
          Under Control No. 8450-AA-03-0-8-LT                    )

           For the Protester: Charles M. Nash.      For the Government:     Lorilyn Simkins,
    Assistant Corporation Counsel.

          Opinion by Administrative Judge Zoe Bush, with Administrative Judges Marlin
    and Davis concurring.

                                           OPINION

           The instant protest of Nash/Boyd alleges that with regard to Invitation for Bids
    (IFB) No. 8450-AA-03-0-8-LT: (1) the apparent low bidder, Superior Couriers, failed to
    submit the required number of copies of its bid, and (2) improper bid opening
    procedures were carried out by the Department of Administrative Service, Material
    Management Administration. Wherefore, Nash/Boyd requests that Superior Couriers's
    offer be rejected and that Nash/Boyd be given consideration as the responsive low bidder.

          The IFB under protest was issued on August 11, 1988 by the Department of
    Administrative Services (DAS) in the sheltered market to procure courier services for the
    Department of Buman Services (DBS). Two bids were opened by the District on
    September 13, 1998, Nash/Boyd for $24,600.00 and Superior Couriers for $18,000.00. The
    apparent low bidder was Superior Couriers.

         The District concedes that Superior Couriers failed to submit the required number
    of copies with the original of its bid (Agency Report at 5). The District correctly points
    out, however, that such failure constitutes a minor irregularity that the contracting
    officer may waive. The Board agrees. Section 1535.1 of the District of Columbia
    Regulations for Contracts and Procurement, 27 DCMR §1535.1, provides that minor
    irregularities in bids may be waived if the contracting officer determines that the waiver
    is in the best interest of the District. Specifically, §1535.2(a) provides that the
    contracting officer may determine that the failure of the bidder to return the number of
    copies required by the IFB is a minor irregularity, 27 DCMR §1535.2(a). Thus, the
    District properly waived Superior Couriers's failure to submit additional copies.

        Nash/Boyd also argues that the District failed to follow proper bid opening
    procedures because (1) bids were opened at 2:15 on September 13, 1988; (2) no copy of
                                          -2-

Superior Couriers's bid was provided at bid opening; and (3) oral and not written
information of Superior Couriers's bid was made available at bid opening. The District
has submitted affidavits of DAS representatives who conducted the bid opening which
show that: (1) at 2 p.m. the District stopped receiving bids consistent with the IFB; (2)
the District read aloud each bidder's name and bid price at opening; and (3) the District
made the original Superior Couriers's bid available for public inspection after the bid
opening. The Board finds that these actions by the District are in compliance with
§I527 of the District's procurement regulations.

       Specifically, the Board finds that: (1) the IS-minute delay in opening bids is not
material in that no bids were accepted after 2 p.m., consistent with the IFB and with 27
DCMR §I527.I; and (2) the District's oral recitation of bids was consistent with 27
DCMR §I527.2 which provides that the name of each bidder, the bid price and other
appropriate information "shall be read aloud or otherwise made available." Finally, the
District acted properly and within its discretion in making the original Superior Couriers
bid available, in that 27 DCMR §§I527.4, 1527.5 allow for supervised examinations of
bids by interested persons.

    Wherefore the Board finds that the District properly conducted the opening of bids
concerning the IFB at issue here and properly waived the requirement for additional
copies of the Superior Couriers original bid.

         The protest is DENIED.


DATE:       ~y   n.   1991
                                                ZO~SH
                                                Ad     istratlve Judge


CONCUR:




WILLIAM L DAVIS
Chief Administrative Judge




DAVID H. MARLIN
Administrative Judge


ZB/bit
