                                                                       May 17 1991


                 GOVERNMENT OF THE DISTRICf OF COLUMBIA
                        CONTRACf APPEALS BOARD


PROTEST OF:

       METROPOLITAN PEST CONTROL, INC.                     )
                                                           )      CAB No. P-I23
       Under IFB No. 8323-AA-68-0-DM                       )


     For the Protester: Michael F. Bryant, Operations Manager. For the Government:
Howard S. Schwartz, Assistant Corporation Counsel, D.C.

      Opinion by Administrative Judge Marlin with Administrative Judges Booker and
Davis concurring.


                                     BACKGROUND

        On August 12, 1988, the Department of Administrative Services (DAS) awarded a
contract to provide pest control services at various locations for the Department of Public
Works (DPW) to Hood's Pest Control (Hood), pursuant to the above-referenced invitation
for bids (IFB). See Agency Report received by the Board on September 22, 1988 at 1, 2.
A week later, on August 19, Metropolitan Pest Control, Inc. (MPC), the protester, filed a
letter of protest with the Board.

       Hood, one of four bidders, had been declared the lowest responsive bidder on July
13, 1988. Id. at 2 and exh. B. On August 12, 1988, DPW made a determination, Id. at
2, exh. C, that Hood was a "responsible" contractor that could fulfill the needs of the
District with respect to this contract. Determinations of responsibility, which include a
review of a bidder's financial, technical and organizational resources, as well as prior
performance, are conducted in accordance with 27 DCMR § 2201 (July 1988).

      In its protest letter, MPC stated three grounds for objecting to the contract award
to Hood, as follows:

      1.       The otTer is in violation of contract specifications numbers 1, 4, and
               5 of page 17 of 33.1


 !/These numbered paragraphs refer to the scope of the contract, the portions of each
building to be serviced and the type of insecticide to be used, respectively.




                                     2958
                                                                      May 17 1991

                                            -2-
       2.      Offer does not comply with wage standards, as set forth by
               the Department of Labor.

       3.      Offer is deficient in ability to meet Federal and/or District
               of Columbia tax obligations.

      The District, in its Agency Report, concluded that MPC was resting its case on the
proposition that Hood's proposal costs to perform the contract were below actual
performance costs, indicating that Hood would not meet its contractual obligations.l

       The District's response is two fold: (1) allegedly low bid prices relate to a bidder's
responsibility and the District has made a determination that Hood is a responsible
bidder, and (2) the District's responsibility determination may not be reviewed by the
Board absent proof of fraud or bad faith.

       On October 4, 1988, MPC filed comments on the Agency Report in which it
disagreed with the District's positions, and requested a fact-finding hearing.


                                         OPINION

      MPC's allegations of defects in Hood's proposal relate both to issues of
responsiveness and responsibility.

      A threshold issue, however, is whether MPC's protest meets the minimum
standards of the Board.

       In US Sprint Communications Company, 1 PD 33, 34 (D.C. CAB 1987), the Board
dismissed a protest for failure to provide a "clear and concise statement of the legal and
factual grounds of the proteSt."3 We pointed out that protests must not be based only on
conjecture or speculation, or on a mere expression of disagreement with the contracting
agency's decision. We stated, further, that protests may not be developed piecemeal, that


YIn the last sentence of the August 19, 1988 protest letter, MPC states, "We charge that
the contractor cannot comply with contract specifications, wage and tax obligations without
suffering a financial loss."

~Our    regulations contain a similar requirement. See the Board's proposed rule at the
time this case was filed, 300.3(c), 33 D.C. Reg. 5670 (1986), and the current rule, 302.1(c),
36 D.C. Reg. 2711 (1989).




                                        2959
                                                                        May 17 1991

                                           ·3·

is, the protester from the outset must be able to allege sufficient facts and legal grounds
to justify the Board's consideration.

        We believe that MPC has failed to meet this standard. With respect to its first
issue, the violation of three specifications of the contract, MPC merely stated that Hood's
proposal was unacceptable but provided no factual or legal basis for that charge. The
other two issues raised in the protest letter are equally bare of substance. Nor did MPC's
comments of October 4, 1988 supply the missing information.

        A protest consisting only of conclusionary statements regarding a contractor's
inability to perform, unsupported by factual information or legal argument, is insufficient
to satisfy the Board's requirements as expressed in rule 300.3(c).

       MPC's request for the Board to conduct a fact.finding hearing, which would
amount to a fishing expedition, is rejected. Evidentiary hearings are predicated on
unresolved genuine issues of material facts. See Rule 311.1, 36 D.C. Reg. 2715 (1989).

       Even if MPC had alleged sufficient facts and legal arguments to justify a decision
on the merits, the record does not support a claim that the District's affirmative
responsibility determination should be overturned.          No reasonable grounds for
questioning DPW's decision have been presented.

                                         ORDER


      The protest is DENIED.


DATE: July 28, 1989                                         0~ f.).!1~
                                                          DAVID H. MARLIN
                                                          Administrative Judge


CONCUR:



c21ril':~~F
Administrative Judge


 Lj~/~'
WILLIAM L DAVIS
Chief Administrative Judge


                                        2960
