District of Columbia Register                                                                        JUl 2 - _




                                GOVERNMENT OF THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA
                                       CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD



            PROTEST OF:

                    MICRO COMPUTER COMPANY, INC.                               )
                                                                               )   CAB No. P-226
                    Under IFB No. 9505-AA-99-1-CE                              )   Reconsideration


                                                          OPINION

                  This is a motion for reconsideration of the Board's Opinion and Order dated
           January 9, 1992,!I which denied the government's motion to dismiss the protest, on the
           ground that a protest which challenges the solicitation or qualifications of a bidder
           responding to the solicitation is a valid protest for purposes of this Board's jurisdiction
           and cannot be considered premature or speculative simply because no award has been
           made. Additionally, in denying the government's motion to dismiss, the Board overruled
           A.A. Beiro Construction Co., Inc.Y and its progeny, and held that a pre-award challenge
           to the responsiveness of an otTer and qualifications of an otTeror or bidder constitutes a
           valid protest within the jurisdiction of the Board.

                  The government filed its motion for reconsideration on February 3, 1992, and the
           protestor did not respond. Pursuant to Rule 313, Rules of Practice of the D.C. Contract
           Appeals Board, 36 DCR 2716 (April 21, 1989), a party may, by motion, request
           reconsideration of a Board decision. Such a motion shall be conducted in accordance with
           Rule 117 of the Board's Rules, "except that the time periods contained in subsections 117.2
           and 117.4 shall be shortened to fifteen (15) days." Rule 313.2. Thus, pursuant to Rule
           117.2,36 DCR 2696, the government's motion for reconsideration should have been filed
           within 15 days after the Board's decision was transmitted. The record shows that the
           decision was transmitted on January 9, 1992. Adding three (3) days for mailing,~ the
           government should have received the Board's Opinion on January 13, 1992. Calculating
           15 days from the latter date, the government should have filed its motion by no later than




          IIThe decision contains a typographical error respecting the date.

          Y1 P.D. 60 (D.C. CAB 1987).

          ,!/Rule 122.4, 36 DCR 2698.




                                                          4388
District of Columbia Register                                                                              JUL 2 - . .




                                                        -2-        CAB No. P.226, Micro Computer Company, Inc.


           January 28, 1992. Therefore, the motion for reconsideration is untimely and should be
           DENIED.

                  However, because the Board's decision herein will have significance in the conduct
           of future protest actions, the Board will consider the substance of the motion for
           reconsideration.

                   Pursuant to Rule 117.1, a party to a protest may request reconsideration of a
           decision or order for the following reasons: (1) clarification; (2) presentation of newly-
           discovered evidence which by due diligence could not have been presented prior to a
           decision; (3) patent errors on the face of the decision; and (4) the decision contains errors
           of fact or law. The motion for reconsideration itself must set forth the following: (1) the
           particular points of fact or law which the moving party believes the Board has overlooked
           or misunderstood; (2) any argument in support of the motion; and (3) the relief sought
           and reason therefor. Rule 117.3. Further, a party requesting reconsideration must show
           that the prior decision contains either errors of fact or law or has information not
           previously considered that warrants reversal or modification of the decision. Macton
           Construction. Inc.-Recon., CAB No. P-203, 4 P.D. 912.

                   In its motion, the government argues: (1) that the Board's Opinion contradicts the
           requirements and procedures established by the Procurement Practices Act of 1985, D.C.
           Code § §1-1181.1, et seq. (1987) (PPA) for bid protests; (2) the facts of the case do not rise
           to the level of a dispute concerning an aggrieved party; and (3) the opinion would impact
           on the ability of the contracting officer to determine the lowest responsible and responsive
           bidder and would lead to the filing of numerous anticipatory actions by actual or
           prospective bidders, thereby incurring a needless waste of time on essentially premature
           matters.


          The Board's Opinion Supports the Requirements
          and Procedures Established for Bid Protests under
          the PPA and Its Implementing Regulations.

                 The Government claims that the Board misinterpreted the PPA and its protest
          jurisdiction by holding that a protestor who challenges the responsiveness of the bid of the
          apparent awardee, after bid opening but prior to the date of award, is an "aggrieved party"
          for purposes of the Board's jurisdiction and has made a valid challenge to the solicitation
          for award of a contract. In support of its position, the government declares that the
          Board's protest jurisdiction is derived from section 903 of the PPA, D.C. Code §1-
          1189.3(1), whil:h states that the Board shall have jurisdiction to review and determine de
          novo:




                                                   4389
District of Columbia Register                                                                           JUL 1- , .




                                                        -3 -      CAB No. P-216, Micro Computer Company, Inc.


                    Any protest of a solicitation or award of a contract . . . by any actual or
                    prospective bidder or offeror, or a contractor who is aggrieved in connection
                    with the solicitation or award of a contract; . • .

            The government then goes on to cite Rule 300.2, 36 DCR 3710, which provides the
            purported definition of "aggrieved person" as "one who has suffered a loss or injury or has
            had a legal right violated as a result of adverse agency action." In further support, the
            government cites the definition of "aggrieved party" found· in the 1968 edition of Black's
            Law Dictionary. The government concludes by stating that because, in the instant matter,
            the government had not taken any action and because the bidder's pecuniary interest had
            not been affected by a "decree or judgment", the protestor could not quality as an
            "aggrieved party". Furthennore, concludes the government, protestor could not be an
            "aggrieved party" because it had not suffered a loss or injury or had a le~al right violated.

                   The government fails to recognize that the statute giving the Board its protest
           jurisdiction also involves the question of a protestor's standing, i.e .. whether the litigant
           is entitled to have the Board detennine the merits of its pre-award dispute. See Allen v.
           Wright, 468 U.S~ 737 (1984).             -

                  In order to have standing, a protestor must establish that it has suffered or will
           suffer injury in fact from the contested action and that its interests are within the zone
           of interests protected by a statute. Control Data Corp. v. Baldridge, 655 F.2d 283 (D.C.
           Cir. 1981). Stated more succinctly:
                                ,
                   [A]t an irreducible minimum [standing] requires the party who invokes the
                   court's authority to 'show that he personally has suffered some actual or
                   threatened injury as a result of the putatively illegal conduct of the
                   defendant,'...

           Valley Forge Christian College v. Americans United for Separation of Church and State.
           Inc., 454 U.S. 464, 472 (1982), quoting Gladstone Realtors v. Village of Bellwood, 441 U.S.
           91, 99 (1979).

                 The most common fonn of injury in government contract cases is the economic
           loss which would result from loss of the contract; and injury in fact clearly exists in the
           case of a person who submits a bid or proposal. As stated by the Circuit Court of
           Appeals for the Fifth Circuit:

                   Unlike the type of delicate question which arises when a plaintiff alleges an
                   injury of a non-economic nature to interests which are widely shared, . . .




                                                   4390
ni~trict   of Columbia Register                                                                                        JUL 2 -   1993



                                                                   -4-         CAB No. P-226, Micro Computer Company, Inc-


                       the economic injury suffered by a losing bidder in seeking a government
                       procurement contract is manifest. . . .

               Hayes International Corp. v. McLucas, 509 F.2d 247, 255 (5th Cir. 1975), cert. denied 423
               U.S. 864 (1975).

                     Sufficient IDJUry is also sutTered by a potential competitor who is denied the
              opportunity to compete, Aero Corp. v. Department of the Navy, 540 F.Supp. 180 (D.D.C.
              1982), or whose product or services is precluded from consideration by the government's
              specifications. Honeywell Information Systems, Inc. v. Devine, C.A. No. 84-2967 (D.D.C.
              1984); Ray Baillie Trash Hauling, Inc. v. Kleppe, 477 F.2d 696 (5th Cir. 1973).~

                      Thus, the adverse agency action which gave rise to the protest in this instance was
              the determination of another company as the apparent low bidder, based upon, inter alia,
              its alleged responsiveness to the solicitation. Because protestor was the second low bidder,
              that governmental decision triggered its threatened economic injury, thereby rendering it
              an "aggrieved party" for purposes of the Board's jurisdiction.~

                     The government's argument concerning the meaning of the term "solicitation" in
              the context of the PPA's grant of protest jurisdiction is not persuasive. Contrary to the
              government's position, "solicitation" encompasses the entire competitive (and in some
              cases, non-competitive) procurement process used by government agencies to procure
              goods and services. The process ru.ns the gamut, from development of competitive
              procedures, acquisition planning, development of specifications and provisions, soliciting
              competition (through invitations for bids, requests for proposals, etc.), to determining
              responsiveness and responsibility, evaluations of proposals, resolving mistakes,


              1JSee also O'Donnell Construction Company. CAB No. P-158, 4 P.D. 967 (protestor has standing to challenge
              whether Invitations for bid were properly set aside but has no standing to challenge the solicitation once
              properly set-aside.) See also O'Donnell Construction Co. v. District of Columbia, C.A. No. 89-01867 (May
              5, 1992), Slip Op. at 5.

              :!IThe government puts great emphasis on the definition of "aggrieved party" found in the 1968 edition of
              Black's Law Dictionary. That emphasis is clearly misplaced. The definition of "aggrieved party" at page 60
              in the 1979 edition of Black's Law Dictionary refers the reader to the definition of "standing". There, at
              page 1260, it is stated, under "Standing to sue doctrine":

                     Standing Is the requirement that the plaintiffs have been injured or been threatened with
                     injury by governmental action complained of, and focuses on the question of whether the
                     litigant is the proper party to fight the lawsuit, not whether the Issue itself is Justiciable.

             In essence, one cannot simply premise its argument on a single definition. One must look further to
             understand the (ull meaning of the term and the legal context in which it is used.




                                                            4391.
District of Columbia Register                                                                                         JUl! - . .




                                                                -5-         CAB No. P-226, Micro Computer Company, Inc.

            negotiations, awards and debriefings. See R. Nash, Jr. and J. Cibinic, Jr., Formation of
            Government Contracts, Chapters 4 through 6 (2d ed. 1986). Each of the actions
            mentioned above are contract actions, part of the solicitation process; and anyone can
            clearly compro,nise the competition that leads to award. Where that happens, a contract
            award controversy, or bid protest, may arise. Id., Chapter 10, p. 1005. Thus, to attempt
            to restrict the term to formal contract documents is unsupportable.


            The Protest Is A Valid Pre-Award Dispute
            for Purposes of This Board's Jurisdiction.

                  While acknowledging that a protest is a pre.award dispute, the government argues
           that the protest in question is not such a dispute because it is premature. In this regard,
           the government goes to great lengths in an attempt to distinguish the meaning of the
           term "dispute" in a protest context (as opposed to an appeal of a contracting officer's final
           decision) and concludes that because no award was made, the instant protest is not a pre-
           award dispute.

                  Here, it is clear that the government simply disagrees with the Board's prior
           decision. As stated earlier herein, "[a] party requesting reconsideration must show that
           the prior decision contains either errors of fact or law or that the [party] has information
           not previously considered that warrants reversal or modification of the decision.
           Repetition of arguments made during the original protest, or mere disagreement with the
           decision, does not meet this standard." Madon Construction, Inc., supra, at 913 (and
           cases cited therein).

                  In addition, the cases cited by the government lend little, if any, support to its
           position. Mustang Industrial Cleaners, B·172531 (March 5, 1976), 76-1 CPD !158
           concerns a purported "protest" of matters which the Comptroller General found were
           aspects of contract administration and not for resolution under the Comptroller General's
           bid protest procedures.§!



           ~The  protestor alleged that the government failed to properly follow the disputes clause, improperly withheld
           funds and denied requests for constructive changes. Clearly, these were matters arising under the
           performance of a contract and had nothing to do with contract formation, i.e. the solicitation process.

             Additionally, the government has misread the Court of Appeals' reason for citation to this case in footnote
           3 of its decision in Jones & Artis Construction Company v. District of Columbia Contract Appeals Board,
           549 A.2d 315, 319 (D.C. App. 1988). In that case, appellant argued, inter alia, that cancellation of an
           invitation Cor bids was subject to appeal, not merely a protest, and thereCore was timely filed with the
           Board within the requisite 9O-day period. Id. at 317. The Court was contrasting appeals ". . • as
                                                                                                          (continued ...)




                                                           4392
District of Columbia Register                                                                                         JUt 1- 1fI9S




                                                                - 6 -        CAB No. P-226, Micro Computer Company, Inc.


                    The Wilkenson Group-Recon., B-243291.2 (July 11, 1991), 91-2 CPD !47 concerned,
            inter alia, allegations of ineptness and bias in the evaluation of proposals submitted under
            a request for proposals (RFP). While finding that the protest was premature because the
            agency had not yet made a determination on the acceptability of proposals, the
            Comptroller General stated:

                      If at the time otTerors are notified of evaluation results and/or of award, and
                      Wilkenson finds the results objectionable, then it may file its protest with
                      our Office within 10 working days of notification.

           Id. at 3. Thus, the Comptroller General clearly acknowledged that a protest may be filed
           before award, i.e. upon notification of evaluation results and that it would have
           jurisdiction thereof. See also Barrett and Blandford Associates. Inc., B-240723 (September
           12, 1990), 90-2 CPD !204 (in an RFP situation, the protest was found to be premature
           because the agency had not yet determined the acceptability of proposals).

                   Foxbro Systems. Inc., B-24S088j B-24S089j B-24S090 (September 13, 1991), 91-2
           CPD !243 is equally inapposite. There, the protestor alleged that it believed that the
           government intended to purchase equipment for installation by means of extending an
           existing contract. In essence, the protest was not based upon a fact. Here, however, the
           protestor alleges specific facts to support its position, e.g. failure to provide proper
           certification for independent price determination, an element the protestor knew at the
           time of bid opening. The cases are easily distinguishable.

                  Consequently, the government's position regarding the non-existence of a dispute
           is without merit.


           The Board's Decision Does Not Place Severe Restrictions on the
           Appropriate Evaluation of Bids and Ultimately on the Ability of
           the District to Cam Out the Policies and Purposes of the PPA.

                 As the Board understands the government's position, the argument is that the
           Board will be forcing the government to determine bid responsiveness well before it has


           ~/ (... continued)
           customarily limited to issues or contract performance .... with bid protests, i.e. "•.. complaints about the
           solicitation and award or contracts... ." Id. at 319. In essence, by citing Mustanl!, the Court or Appeals was
           trying to make clear that issues of contract performance, which only arise after contract award, do not
           belong in the bid protest arena. In the instant case, the issue of bid responsiveness arises prior to contract
           award--and is a valid subject for a bid protest.




                                                           4393
District of Columbia Register                                                                                    JUl 2 - 1998




                                                              ·7·          CAB No. P.226, Micro Computer Company, InC.


             had an opportunity to evaluate all bids, especially where a bidder challenges the
             responsiveness of a competitor's bid immediately after bid opening. Additionally, the
             government argues that the Board would be putting itself in the position of the contracting
             officer in determining bid responsiveness, an improper expansion of Board authority. This
             argument has no merit.

                   Section 1531.1 of Title 27, DCMR defines responsiveness in terms of materiality of
            nonconformity with a solicitation. That section states, "Any bid that fails to conform to
            the essential requirements of the IFB shall be rejected." (emphasis added) This requisite
            is almost reiterated in 27 DCMR §1S41.1:

                    Each contract shall be awarded to the responsible and responsive bidder
                    whose bid meets the requirements set forth in the IFB. . .. (emphasis
                    added)Y

                   Questions of responsiveness are decided only on the basis of information submitted
            with the bid and on the facts available at the time of bid opening. Thus, bid
            responsiveness is an area in which the contracting officer has limited discretion and
            concerns the issue of whether a prospective contractor has promised to do exactly what
            the government has asked. On the other hand, responsibility determinations surround
            the question of whether the bidder has the ability to perform as promised; and such
            decisions are made on the basis of all information submitted or available up to the time
            of award. See Formation of Government Contracts, supra, Chapter S.

                    Thus, in a sealed bid scenario, responsiveness is determined at the time of bid
          . opening and clearly concerns material compliance with the requirements contained in the
            soJjcitation documents. If a proposed awardee's bid is deemed by a competitor not to
            comply, that question is properly raised at that time or within 10 days thereafter with the
            Board. D.C. Code §1.1189.8(b).

                  Moreover, that the government will have to defend against a protest which
           challenges responsiveness within the bid acceptance period is of no moment. This is so
           because unlike our federal counterpart (GSBCA) and the Comptroller General, this Board
           does not have the authority to suspend or enjoin contract award or performance pending
           a protest. Group Insurance Administration, Inc., CAB No. P.309, 4 P.D. 992. Therefore,
           a contracting officer may proceed with the award process, i.e. determine responsibility
           and make award during the pendency of a protest. No "chilling effect" will result on the


           Z/Compare FAR §14.301(a), which states:

                   To be considered for award, a bid must comply in all material respects with the invitation
                   for bids. Such compliance enables all bidders to stand on an equal footing and maintains
                   the integrity of the sealed bid system. (emphasis added)



                                                         4394
DistriCt of COlumDia   neyl~LDI                                                                                  JUll - 1998



                                                              •8.         CAB No. P.226, Micro Computer Company, Inc.


             a protest. Group Insurance Administration. Inc., CAB No. P·309, 4 P.D. 992. Therefore,
             a contracting officer may proceed with the award process, i.e. determine responsibility
             and make award during the pendency of a protest. No "chilling effect" will result on the
             ability of the government to carry out its mandate under the PPA.!'

                    Furthermore, there should be no trepidation that the Board will have to consider
             numerous premature and all!kipatory protests. If they arise, they will be dealt with
             accordingly.


             Conclusion

                   The government's request for reconsideration contains no statement of facts or
            legal grounds which warrant modification or reversal. It only raises issues unsupportable
            in the law and reiterates arguments already made and considered by the Board.
            Consequently, the motion for reconsideration is DENIED.



            DATE:          May 12. 1992




            CONCUR:




            Chi    Administrative Judge



           ~#,~
            BENJ     N B. TERNER
            Administrative Judge



           ~However, the government may have to fight the challenge in another arena. See Group Insurance
           Administration v. D.C. Office of Controller, C.A. No. 92·2093 (Memonmdum Opinion and Order, April 1,
           1992) (wherein the Superior Court for the District of Columbia enjoined contract performance pending a
           decision on the protest).

             Furthermore, a protest lodged prior to award will give the government the opportunity to review its own
           work; and It may decide to withhold award pending that review. The federal sector provides ample
           regulatory precedent for that process. See FAR §33.103.



                                                        4395
