                 GOVERNMENT OF THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA
                        CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD



PROTEST OF:

      LEWIS SYSTEMS                                     )
                                                        )      CAB No. P-252
      Under IFB No. OMS-0111-AA-AS                      )


       For the Protester: John R. Wilde, General Manager.            For the Government:
Erie F. Sampson, Assistant Corporation Counsel.

       Opinion by Administrative Judge William L. Davis, with Judge David H. Marlin
concurring.!!

                                        OPINION

      Lewis Systems (Lewis) protests the rejection of its bid as nonresponsive and the
award of a contract under Invitation for Bids (IFB) No. OMS-0111-AA-AS, issued by the
Government of the District of Columbia, Department of Public Works (District), for
heavy duty curbside recycling containers. Lewis contends that it was the lowest
responsive bidder.

       In response to the IFB, eight bids were received on bid opening day (August 27,
1990) ranging in price from $657,000 to $1,797,525. Lewis' bid was the lowest at
$657,000. The second lowest bidder was Rehrig Pacific Company (Rehrig) in the amount
of $749,250. On September 27, 1990, the District awarded the contract to Rehrig, the
lowest responsive and responsible bidder. Lewis' bid of $657,000 was rejected, the
District asserts, because it failed to meet all the material terms of the specifications and
thus was determined to be nonresponsive. On October 9, 1990, Lewis filed this protest
with the Board.

       The District maintains that Lewis' bid is nonresponsive because it offered curbside
recycling containers that did not meet a material requirement of the specifications. The
contract specifications required the recycling containers to have a drainage capacity at
the bottom to "accumulate 10-14 ounces of fluid and adequate vent holes to drain any




 YJudge Claudia D. Booker, a member of the panel, did not participate in this decision.
                                          -2-

fluid in excess of 14 ounces." (Exh. B to Agency Report.) In addition, the special
conditions required the furnishing of descriptive literature with the bid to show that the
product being offered conformed to the specifications.Y The descriptive literature
submitted by Lewis with its bid contained the following description of the drainage
capacity of the containers it proposed to provide:

       Specially designed bottom allows pooling of up to 9 oz. of liquid. Eight
       drain holes (.25") prevent excess accumulation. Also available without
       drain holes.

In addition the literature contains a specification section with various columns depicting
dimensions, nesting ratio, volume, weight, wall thickness, hot stamp area and liquid
pooling amount. The liquid pooling amount column contains the figure 9 ounces. (Exh.
D to Agency Report.)

       In its protest petition Lewis acknowledges that the technical data submitted states
"9 ounces" as the actual amount of water which is retained in the channel of the
containers it proposed to provide. Its maintains, however, that there exists an additional
area between the channel and the drain holes which would increase the pooling amount
so as to allow the containers to meet the specifications requirement of 10-14 ounces.
Moveover, Lewis argues that the District never raised the "pooling issue" during the
evaluation of the bids. In addition, Lewis seems to suggest that because its bid was
some $92,250 less than Rehrig, the District should now require that the parties'
submissions be tested side-by-side.

       Some 27 days after Lewis filed its protest it submitted an addendum, which
consists of a report dated October 31, 1990, containing the results of tests made on the
pooling capacity of two models of the Lewis containers and two models of the Rehrig
containers by Bjorksten Research Laboratories Inc. of Watertown, WI. The test results




  YSPECIAL CONDITIONS

       9.     REQUIREMENT FOR DESCRIPTIVE LITERATURE:

              A.     Descriptive literature must be furnished as a part of the bid and
                     must be received before the time set for opening bids. The literature
                     furnished must be identified to show the items in the bid to which it
                     pertains. The descriptive literature is required to establish, for the
                     purpose of bid evaluation and award, details of the products the
                     bidder proposes to furnish as to design, material, quality,
                     construction and performance characteristics.
                                           -3-

show that the pooling capacities of the two Lewis models were 11.5 and 11.3 fl. oz. The
two Rehrig models had pooling capacities of 223 and 15.8 fl. oz.~

       The District of Columbia Procurement Practices Act of 1985 (PPA) , D.C. Code
ยง1-1183.3(e) (1987 Repl.) requires that contracts solicited by competitive sealed bidding
shall:

        [b]e awarded with reasonable promptness by written notice to the
        responsive and responsible bidder whose bid will be most advantageous to
        the District, considering price and other factors. (Emphasis supplied.)

        A responsive bidder is defined in the PPA as a person who has submitted a bid
which conforms in all material respects to the IFB, ยง1-1181.7(41). A responsive bid
must present an unequivocal offer to provide the exact item called for in the solicitation.
The District's acceptance of such a bid legally binds the offeror to perform in accordance
with all the material terms of the solicitation. We have held that the term "material," as
it relates to responsiveness, means that which affects price, quantity, quality or delivery
of the item offered. See, Faith Construction Co. (D.C. CAB, March 1990), citing
Forrester Constructor, Inc. (D.C. CAB 1987); ZAV Electrical Contractors, Inc. (D.C.
CAB 1988); and W.M. Schlosser Co., Inc. (D.C. CAB 1988).

        It is clear to this Board that the drainage capacity of the recycling containers is a
material term of the specifications, affecting not only price but quality. That being the
case, the protester, in order to prevail, must show by a preponderance of the evidence
that it offered to provide the exact item called for under the specifications; and that its
descriptive literature showed that the product offered conformed to the specifications.
The protester has failed to carry this burden. Its general allegation that its product met
the specifications is not sufficient to overcome the deficiency created by the descriptive
literature it supplied. The literature submitted by Lewis clearly shows that the drainage
capacity of the Lewis Systems containers is less than what the specifications called for.
We do not believe that the District had an obligation to go behind the descriptive
literature to see whether the difference was significant. Since the descriptive literature
evidenced nonconformance with the specifications, the determination that the protester's
bid was nonresponsive was proper.

       The protester's assertion that it should be awarded the contract because its bid
was lower by some $92,250 is without merit. The rejection of Lewis' bid certainly may
increase the price of this procurement; however, a nonresponsive bid cannot be accept~d



  ~It should be pointed out here that the record is silent with respect as to whether the
models tested were the same models which the two companies submitted for bids. The
District filed its Agency Report after the addendum was filed with this Board and did
not comment on the test results in its report.
                                                                    -4-

even though it would result in savings to the District because such acceptances would
compromise the integrity of the competitive bidding system mandated by the PPA.

       The supplementary materials submitted by the protester cannot be considered for
the law is well settled that a nonresponsive bid cannot be made responsive after bid
opening. Forrest Constructors, Inc. (D.C. CAB 1987).


                                                                   ORDER

            The protest is DENIED.



                                                                             .   }   1~
DATE: _ _...:A..:.Ip=r..:..:il,-,1",,1'l-'-"'1"-'99:;....:1'--__           ILilL/YV(
                                                                           WILLIAM L. DAVIS
                                                                           Chief Administrative Judge




CONCUR:


~l/~<;~v IJ                    L    r/cvJt;,
DAVID H. MARLIN
Administrative Judge
