                      GOVERNMENT OF THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA
                             CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD




PROTEST OF:

           ADVANCED MEDI CAL SYSTEMS, INC.                          )
                                                                    )       CAB No. P-202
           Under IFB No. 081-9-65-CW (Fetal Monitors) )


      For the Protestor: Thomas C. Fisher, Sales/Market Manager, Advanced Medical
Systems, Inc. For the Government: Duane A. Brown, Acting Contracting Officer, D.C.
General Hospital.

      Opinion by Administrative Judge Terry Hart Lee, with Administrative Judge Zoe
Bush concurring.lJ

                                                  OPINION

       On May 17, 1989, D.C. General Hospital ("DCGH") issued IFB No. 081-9-65-CW
for four (4) fetal monitors. The items requested were described as "Fetal Monitor Model
115 w/accessories (Corometrics #OOl15AAA) or equal", accompanied by a list of 10 salient
characteristics. Five (5) accessories requested were also based on a Corometrics
instrument or equal.

      Bid opening was scheduled for June 29, 1989. On June 9, 1989, Advanced Medical
Systems, Inc. (hereinafter "protestor" or "AMS") submitted a bid for its Model IM76 Fetal
Monitor. The bid was accompanied by descriptive literature for the "Model IM76
Intrapartum Monitor." At the time it submitted its bid, AMS stated that the instrument
"meets or exceeds the requirements as listed" in the solicitation.

      Bids were opened on June 29, 1989, with four (4) bids having been received.
Protestor was the low bidder at a price of $6,115.00. Hewlett-Packard, the subsequent
awardee, was the third low bidder at a unit price of $8,505.38.

      The bids were evaluated on July 3, 1989. AMS' bid was rejected because (1) it did
not provide electrical leak specifications, and (2) it did not provide phono
(autocorrelation).




           lJDue to an extended illness, Administrative Judge Benjamin B. Terner has not participated in this
opinion.
                                                     -2-

      Thereafter, on July 31, 1989, one of protestor's representatives called DCGH and
was advised that even though its bid was low, the order was issued to Hewlett-Packard.
AMS was also told that the bases for rejection of its bid were that it did not provide
autocorrelation and did not specity the leakage current of the monitor.

       By letter dated August 1, 1989, AMS protested to DCGH award of the order to
anyone other than the low bidder. Protestor stated that it did provide autocorrelation in
the form of Ultrasound Signature Recognition (USR) , a trademarked version of the
autocorrelation technique. AMS admitted, however, that it did not specify the leakage
current in its brochure. With regard to the latter, protestor said, "... [O]ur specifications
for leakage current are as good as anyone else in the industry..•." Protestor went on
to say the DCGH could have called if it had had any questions on the leakage current.
There is no evidence that DCGH ever responded to protestor's letter.

      On August 28, 1989, AMS filed a timely protest with the Contract Appeals Board
("CAB" or "Board").21 Therein, it reiterated its bases for the protest filed with the DCGH
on August 1, 1989.


        2/D.C. Code§§ 32-201, et seq. (1987) established the D.C. General Hospital as an independent agency
  and the D.C. General Hospital Commission (Commission) as its governing body. Under D.C. Code § 32-
  220(8), the Commission has the authority to enter into contracts "..• to achieve any or all of its purposes.
. . . ." This is so, provided

     that the Commission shall exercise the authority granted by this paragraph only pursuant to
     procurement rules which the Commission shall promulgate that conform to an District 0(
     Columbia and federal laws regarding procurement by the District of Columbia government, •••

Paragraph (e) of D.C. Code §1-1l81.4 (1987) permits an independent agency to agree formally to be bound
by the Procurement ~ractices Act of 1985 and the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder. By
agreement dated November 2, 1989, DCGH engaged the Board to hear and decide appeals and protests
involving DCGH procurements. Therein, the Board and DCGH agreed that the Board shan be the exclusive
hearing tribunal with jurisdiction to hear and decide, de novo, "an appeal from the final decision of the
Hospital's Contracting Officer• .. on (1) any protest of a solicitation or award of a contract. . ... The
agreement also recognized that DCGH's current procurement regulations were "not in complete harmony"
with the agreement. Consequently, the parties agreed that between the time of execution of the agreement
and final publication of conforming procurement regulations, DCGH would provide the right to all
prospective bidders, otTerors and contractors to file a protest initially with DCGH and subsequently with
the Board.

     In the present matter, the protestor filed its protest initially with DCGH. Yet, not only did DCGH
never respond; but also neither the agreement with the Board nor any subsequent procurement regulations
provide a time limit on DCGH to respond to a protest or a time limit from which a protestor may file with
the CAB after receipt of a DCGH decision on a protest. Consequently, we must deem the protest to have
been filed in a timely manner.

    Further, DCGH has not published procurement regulations since the date of the 1989 agreement.
When it does so, it should be mindful of the requirement for procurement regulations set forth in D.C.
Code § 32-220(8), supra.
                                            -3 -

        In Trail Equipment Co., B-241004.2 (February 1, 1991), 91-1 CPD 1[ 102, the
protestor's bid was rejected. as nonresponsive because the descriptive literature submitted
with it to establish the acceptability of the "or equal" product either took exception to, or
failed. to provide information on, various salient characteristics that the solicitation
required the alternate product to meet. In denying the protest, the Comptroller General
stated:

       . . . To be responsive to a brand name or equal solicitation, a bid offering
       an equal product must conform to the salient characteristics of the brand
       name product listed in the solicitation. A bidder must submit with its bid
       sufficient descriptive literature to permit the contracting agency to assess
       whether the equal product meets all the salient characteristics specified. in
       the solicitation. • . . (citation omitted.)

Id. at 3. Moreover, the bid must be rejected. if the literature submitted with the bid, and
any other information available to the contracting officer, does not demonstrate
compliance with the salient characteristics. Id. Accord, Tri-Tool, Inc., B-241703.2 (March
11, 1991), 91-1 CPD , 267.

       In the instant matter, protestor's bid was rejected. because the descriptive literature
accompanying the bid did not show that the alternate product met two salient
characteristics, i.e., autocorrelation and electrical leak specifications.

         Protestor countered by declaring that its Ultrasound Signature Recognition (USR)
is its trademarked. version of autocorrelation and that its specifications for leakage current
were as good as anyone else's in the industry. Protestor also asserted the DCGH could
have called. to find out more about its product.

       While protestor's claims about its USR and leakage current specifications may be
true, these post-bid claims are unavailing. Furthermore, the descriptive literature
submitted. with the bid clearly does not relate USR to autocorrelation or set forth leakage
current specifications.

       Responsiveness must be determined. at the time of bid opening, and, in
       general, solely from the face of the bid and material submitted. with the bid.
       To allow a bidder to make its nonresponsive bid responsive after bid
       opening, . . ., is tantamount to allowing the bidder to submit a new bid.
       (citations omitted.)

Trail Equipment Co., supra, at 4.

      Thus, because protestor's bid and descriptive literature failed. to provide
information on two salient characteristics of the brand name product, its bid was properly
                                        -4-
rejected. Consequently, this protest is DENIED.   Id., Wright Tool Co., B-242800, B-
242800.3 (May 30, 1991), 91-1 CPD ~ 522.


DATE:_--,A~p~n=·I~I:::l.,~1=9=92=---_




CONCUR:




zoJ$f. ~
ChIef Administrative Judge
