District of Columbia Register                                                                                          JUM 1 0 1994


                                 GOVERNMENT OF THE DISTRICf OF COLUMBIA
                                       CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD



             PROTEST OF:

                      KOBA ASSOCIATES, INC.                              )
                                                                         )       CAB No. P-350
                      Under RFP No. JN92046                              )


                  For the Protestor: Keith R. Malley, Esquire. For the Government:                              Nancy K.
             Hapeman and Edward J. Rich, Assistants Corporation Counsel.

                   Opinion by Administrative Judge Terry Hart Lee, with Administrative Judge Zoe
             Bush concurring.!'

                                                    OPINION AND OF-DER

             Introduction

                   On November 6, 1992, Koba Associates, Inc. (hereinafter "protestor" or "Koba") filed
            a protest with the Board against RFP No. JN92046, issued by the Child and Family Services
            Division (CFSD), Family and Child Services Administration, Commission on Social Services,
            Department of Human Services (DHS). In its protest, Koba made five claims. The first was
            that DHS substantially changed the RFP requirements from three family preservation units
            to one such unit without ?roper notice to all offerors. in violation of D.C. Code § § 1-
            1183.3(c) and 1-1183.4(b), as well as 27 DCMR §§ 1602.2,1602.7 and 1300. The second
            claim flowed from the first claim: that because there was a substantial change in
            requirements, the contracting officer should either have issued an amendment to or
            cancelled the solicitation pursuant to 27 DCMR § 1615.3.

                    In its third claim, Koba alleged that the contracting officer issued a call for best and
            final offers (BAFO's) prior to conducting any discussions, in violation of 27 DCMR § §
            1621.2 and 1621.3. In addition, protestor claimed that DHS engaged in technical leveling
            and violated the cost principles (and generally accepted accounting principles) set forth in
            27 DCMR § § 3300.2, 3305.2, 3306.1, 3313.2 and 1215, by attempting to reduce arbitrarily
            protestor's indirect cost rate during contract negotiations.

                  Protestor's fourth contention was that by changing the scope of work and the basis
            for award (by virtue of a September 10, 1992, letter from the contracting officer), DHS

                 l..IAt the time this matter came before the Board, three judges were assigned to the pallel. This decision
            is rendered by a majority vote of the three judges assigned. Rule 101.5, 36 DCR 2686 (April 21, 1989). See
            Federal Trade Commission v. Flotill Products, Inc., 389 U.S. 179 (1967).




                                                            3446
Dmrict 01 Columbia Register                                                                                          JUN 1 0 199'


                                                                -2-                    CAB No. P-350, Koba Associates, Inc.

            violated D.C. Code § 1-1183.4(c) and 27 DCMR § § 1618.1 and 1617.2. Finally, Koba
            alleged that the government violated 27 DCMR § 1621.5 because all offerors were told that
            they must meet a price not to exceed $1 million.

                    Protestor demanded the following: (1) that award be made to it based upon its July
            8, 1992, BAFO; (2) that DHS terminate any award made under the RFP; (3) that DHS
            cancel the RFP and issue a new solicitation; (4) that DHS cease and desist from the conduct
            of discussions regarding the prices that all offerors must meet; and (5) that the Board award
            reasonable proposal preparation costs.

                    After grant of an enlargement of time,£! the government filed its agency report on
            December 18, 1992. Therein, DHS set forth certain facts relating to the procurement. The
            government also argued that by virtue of the language contained in sections A.1, C.2 and
            B.19 of the RFP, the government never reduced its requirements from three family
            preservation units to one such unit. Additionally, DHS asserted that discussions with
            offerors were conducted properly in that: (1) there was no requirement for oral discussions,
            that written discussions were permissible; and (2) there was no improper assistance regarding
            submission of revised proposals. The government contended further that proposal
            evaluations were done properly and that the September 10, 1992, letter from the contracting
            officer represented an immaterial change to the RFP and simply referred to the manner in
            which proposals would be ranked after evaluation.

                    In further support of its position, DHS argued that notification to offerors on the
            limitation of funds for the procurement was proper, citing the case of Sea-Land, B-246784.2,
            92-2 CPD i 122. Finally, the government contended that protestor's allegations regarding
            technical leveling and violation of cost principles were vague and could not be answered.

                    On January 8, 1993, Koba filed its respc;}se to the agency report)! Therein,
            protestor argued that a substantial change was made in the RFP requirements as a result
            of protestor being advised orally during the August 1992 discussions that the RFP required
            proposals for only one family preservation unit, not three as Koba had interpreted the
            requirement. In support of its position, protestor contended that by changing the
            requirement, the government altered the basis for award, because an offeror proposing three
            units at costs below the combined cost of three separate offers would not even be considered
            for award.




               ~/See Order dated December 9, 1992.

               ~/Koba requested a one-day enlargement of time in which to file its response to the agency report. See
           Rule 307.1 of the Board's Rules of Practice. ConSidering the fact that Koba's response was filed prior to its
           request for an extension of time, the request for an extension of time was moot.




                                                          3447
Oistrfct of Cofumbia Register                                                                                              JUN 1 0 19M


                                                                     -3-                     CAB No. P-350, Koba Associates, Inc.

                    Protestor further contended that the discussions held in August 1992 concerned
             alleged deficiencies of which it was not previously apprised when the July 1, 1992, request
             for BAPO's was issued.

                   With regard to proposal evaluations, protestor asserted that DHS' posItIon was
            unsupported because there was no indication that Koba's revised BAFO's covering three
            family preservation units were ever evaluated. Additionally, Koba contended that awards
            were not made in the best interests of the government because DHS failed to take
            advantage of economies of scale by rejecting offers for three units.

                     Significantly, protestor argued that it was not until it had received the agency report
            that it knew that it had been excluded from competition because it allegedly reduced parts
            of its technical proposal below the minimum requirements of the RFP. In essence, protestor
            contended that its exclusion from competition was improper.

                   On January 29, 1993, the government filed a reply to the protestor's response to the
            agency reportY Therein, with respect to allegations regarding changes in the scope of the
            RFP, DHS maintained its initial position. It argued that protestor had presented no
            evidence that an offeror which proposed less than three units would not meet the
            government's minimum needs; and in addition, there was no evidence that all offerors
            believed that a proposal for less than three units would not be responsive. DHS further
            contended that, in any event, the September 10, 1992, letter from the contracting officer
            placed all offerors on an equal footing.

                    With respect to discussions, DHS contended that the regulations gave it the right to
            re-open discussions and to require BAFO's thereafter. . Furthermore, the August 1992
            discussions specifically concerned deficiencies related to the July 8, 1992, BAFO's.

                      DHS maintained its position regarding protestor's allegations of technical leveling.

                   With regard to the indirect cost rate allegations, DHS maintained that the allegations
            remained vague and imprecise and that any explanation by protestor was untimely. The
            government further responded that even though the Department of Administrative Services
            (DAS) had not established an indirect cost rate pursuant to 27 DCMR § 1215, the
            contracting officer was authorized to do so; and his actions were within the parameters of
            the cost principles.

                  With respect to proposal evaluations, DHS asserted that the individual evaluators did
           not evaluate price, and further, that Koba was excluded from competition after September
           16, 1992, because its technical proposal had been modified so that it no longer met the
           government's minimum needs. Specifically, protestor's proposal was not in compliance with
           RFP sections e.3, e.7.3 and e.B.1.


                 of/By letter dated January 25, 1993, the government notified the Board of its intent to file a reply by January
           29.



                                                               3448
District ot Columbia Register                                                                                         JUN 1 0 19M


                                                                 -4-                   CAB No. P-350, Koba Associates, Inc.

                   On February 17, 1993, Koba filed a response to the government's reply to protestor's
            response to the agency report, after requesting leave of the Board to do so. This submission
            was made, in essence, to counter in even greater detail the government's arguments and
            evidentiary submissions.

                   Notwithstanding the number and breadth of the parties' submissions, the Board
            believed that certain material facts were either vague or missing. Therefore, by Order of
            March 5, 1993, the Board asked the government to supplement its submissions by
            responding to specific issues set forth in the Order. The government responded on March
            16, 1993. This submission was deemed unsatisfactory by the Board; so by Order of April 13,
            1993, the Board notified the parties of its intent to convene a protest conference. The
            Order set forth the primary issues to be discussed and the names of individuals whose
            presence was sou~ht. After a three-week delay, a conference was scheduled for and held
            on May 14, 1993. j




                   RFP JN92046, issued on April 13, 1992, was "... for the establishment of three (3)
            community home based intensive short term, crisis intervention and family services units
            designed to preserve the family where the removal of a child is imminent due to physical
            abuse or neglect." (Agency Report, Exhibit 1, section A.1).§/ It was initially contemplated
            that the contract resulting from the RFP would be firm, fixed price ". . . with a cost
            reimbursement component." (Id., section A.3). However, by Amendment #1, dated April
            29, 1992, the contracting officer advised that the resulting contract would be a cost
            reimbursement contract. (AR, Ex. 2).11


               1!See Order dated May 4, 1993.

                ~Hereinafter, references to the agency report and accompanying exhibits shall be "AR, Ex(s). _".
            References to the protest and accompanying exhibits shall be "PEx(s). _". The pleading entitled "Response
           of Koba Associates, Inc. to Agency Report of the District of Columbia" is designated "Koba Response I"; and
           all references thereto and its accompanying exhibits shall be "KRI, Ex(s). _". The filing entitled "Reply of
           the District of Columbia to Response of Koba Associates, Inc. to Agency Report of the District of Columbia"
           is designated "District Reply"; and references to it and its accompanying exhibits shall be "DR, Ex(s). _".
           The filing entitled "Response of Koba Associates, Inc. to Reply of the District of Columbia to Response of
           Koba Associates, Inc. to Agency Report of the District of Columbia" is designated "Koba Response n"; and
           all references thereto and its accompanying exhibits shall be "KRII, Ex(s). _". The submission entitled
           "Response of District of Columbia to Board's Order Dated March 5, 1993," is designated "District's Response
           to Board's Order"; and references to it and accompanying exhibits shall be "DRO, Ex(s). _". Exhibits
           accepted by the Board during the May 14, 1993, protest conference shall be referred to as "ConEx(s). _".

               ZlThe Board sought additional information from the government as to the ~ of cost reimbursement
           contract contemplated. In response, the District stated, "The District contemplated awarding a straight cost-
           reimbursement contract such that contractors would be reimbursed for salaries, rent, travel, administrative
                                                                                                         (continued ... )




                                                           3449
Distict of Columbia Register                                                                                             JUN 1 0 \994


                                                                  -5-                     CAB No. P-350, Koba Associates, Inc.

                     As of January 8, 1992, there existed funding approval for family preservation services
            in the amount of $1 million, $490,550.00 from FY 92 funds and $509,450.00 from FY 93
            funds. (Con.Ex. 1). What purported to be a "cost analysis" was prepared by the program
            staff in or around January 1992. (DRO, Ex. B). It stated that cost for the RFP was based
            on staffing and salaries ($754,695.00 annually), administrative costs ($50,000.00 annually for
            each unit), flexible funds ($24,000.00 annually for 80 families) and travel expenses ($5,000.00
            allotment for each of three units). The "cost analysis" did not make an estimate for fees.
            (Id.).§1

                   The term of the contract to be awarded was 12 months from the date of award, with
            an option for an additional year, subject to the availability of funds. (AR, Ex. 1, section
            A.4). Closing date for receipt of proposals was May 12, 1992.

                    Section B.19.1 of the RFP stated:

                    The District Government will award one or more contracts resulting from this
                    solicitation to the responsible offeror whose offer conforming to the
                    solicitation will be most advantageous to the District Government, in terms of
                    cost or price, technical and other factors specified in the solicitation.
                    (emphasis added).

                   The scope of services was contained in Section C. of the RFP. Sections C.1 and C.2
            emphasized the need for three community, home-based intensive service units so as to avoid
            the necessity of foster care placements. DHS estimated that the average, estimated number
            of families to be served would be 80 per community home-based facility, or a total of
            approximately 240 families. (AR, Ex. 1, section C.3). Section C.5.2 of the RFP defined
            "community based/intensive home-based service unit" as:

                    A unit that provides services to families where the removal of a child or
                    children is imminent because of abuse or neglect. These services provide
                    social, financial, psychological, and other needed resources to families in order
                    to prevent the break-up of the family unit.




               Z/C···continued)
           costs, and client costs." (DRO, Answer 3). However, when asked by the Board during the protest conference
           as to the type of cost reimbursement contract contemplated, the contracting officer stated, with great
           reluctance, that a cost-plus-fIXed-fee contract was contemplated.

               §lIf one gives this "cost analysis" any credence, the total estimated cost for one family preservation service
           unit would be $330,565.00.




                                                             3450
District of Corumbia Register                                                                             JUH 1 0 19M


                                                          -6-                CAB No. P-350, Koba Associates, Inc.

                    Section C.5.6 defined "flexible funds" as:

                    [m Jonies to be used ill conjunction with family preservation treatment services
                    that will be available for the purchase of goods, [sic] and services that will
                    benefit the client family. . .. Expenditures shall not exceed $300.00 per client
                    family.

            With respect to flexible funds, the offeror was to develop a written plan to administer the
            money and include guidelines for use, an authorization process, a method to "access" the
            money, etc. (Id., section C?.3).

                   Section C8 Staff Requirements advised the offeror, at section C8.l., that it was
            required to staff its facility with one Master's of Social Work (MSW) supervisory social
            worker, five MSW social workers and an administrative support person. In addition to a
            Master's Degree, all social workers were required to have an appropriate license. (Id.,
            section C.8.2). All supervisors were to have a minimum of three years' social work
            experience in child welfare. (Id., section C8.3). Additionally, the offeror was to ensure that
            each social worker serve a minimum of 15 to 18 cases per year. (Id., section CS.?).

                    Section D.1 of the RFP stated, in pertinent part:

                    ... In the case of cost reimbursement contracts, one or more cost ceilings
                    shall be established in the contract, based on the agreed upon estimated costs;
                    [sic] [T]he District shall not reimburse the Contractor for any costs in excess
                    of those ceilings except pursuant to a contract modification executed under the
                    terms established in the contract.

                   Section D.2 of the RFP covered audits. That section provided:

                   At any time or times before final payment and three (3) years thereafter, the
                   Contracting Officer may have the Contractor's invoices or vouchers and
                   statements of cost audited. Any payment may be reduced by amounts found
                   by the Contracting Officer not to constitute allowable costs as adjusted for
                   prior overpayment or underpayment.

                  The Evaluation Criteria were set forth in section E of the RFP. Section E.1 stated,
           in pertinent part:

                   The Contract will be awarded to the responsible offeror whose offer is most
                   advantageous to the District, based upon the evaluation criteria specified
                   below. Thus, while the points in the evaluation criteria indicate their relative
                   importance, the total scores will not necessarily be determinative of award.
                   Rather. the total scores will guide the District in making an intelligent award
                   decision based upon the evaluation criteria ... , (emphasis added).




                                                     3451
District of Columbia Register                                                                                         JUN 1 0 1994


                                                                -7-                    CAB No. P-350, Koba Associates, Inc.

            The Technical Criteria, broken down into four sub-criteria (three of which contained sub-
            sub-criteria), were worth 70 points_ (AR, Ex. 1, section E.2.1). The cost/price criteria were
            worth 30 points. (Id., section E.2.2). Points for cost/price were to be determined as follows:

                    The total price for each option period must be included with the initial
                    response to this solicitation. The District will evaluate price proposals by
                    adding the total price for all options to the total price for the base period ....
                    The cost/price evaluation will be objective. The offeror with the lowest price
                    will receive the maximum points. All other proposals will receive a
                    proportionately lower score. See the following formula:

                            Lowest Price proposal x Weight            = Evaluated price score
                            Price of proposal
                            being evaluated

            (emphasis added). (Id., section E.3).

                   This procurement arose as the result of the final court order in LaShawn A. v. Kelly,
            August 26, 1991.21 (Con.Supp.Ex. 1). The Order, generally, required the District "... to
            improve its child welfare system over the next 3 years in order to protect abused and
            neglected children in the District pursuant to the mandates of Federal and District law.... "
            (Implementation Plan, Con.Supp.Ex. 2, p. 1). The Implementation Plan ("Plan") was
            developed by the Center for the Study of Social Policy (the Court Monitor), in collaboration
            with DHS and professional experts in the District of Columbia and from around the country.

                   One of the goals set out in the Plan was to develop community resources to assist
            families to care for their children. (Id., p. 61) One of these components was the
            development of Intensive Family Service Units as necessary. According to the timelines in
            the LaShawn Order, DHS was required to establish five community-based, intensive home-
            based service units in the following manner:

                                    One Unit                          November 24, 1991
                                    Second Unit                       February 24, 1992
                                    Third Unit                        March 24, 1992
                                    Fourth Unit                       May 24,1992
                                    Fifth Unit                        June 24, 1992




               ~Sub nom. LaShawnA. v. Dixon. (D.D.C.). (See AR, Ex. I, section c.l.). On May 21,1993, in response
           to the Board's request made at the May 14 protest conference, the District submitted a copy of the LaShawn
           A v. Dixon Proposed Order, July 10, 1991, and the Implementation Plan, January 31, 1992. The Proposed
           Order, developed by DHS and the American Civil Liberties Union was signed by the court on August 26, 1991.

                  Although the District represented that the Final Order was made a part of the RFP, it clearly was not.
           (AR, Ex. 1, TABLE OF CONTENTS).



                                                          3452
                                                                                                      JUN 1 0 1994


                                                 -8-                  CAB No. P-350, Koba Associates, Inc.

 (Id., p. 63). Estimated level of resources was $250,000 per contract unit per year, with total
 costs for FY 92 at $550,000 and total costs for FY 93 at $1.15 million. (Id., p. 64).101

        Another goal set out in the Plan was for the District "... to create the staff capacity
 and implement policies and procedures to assure that al1 families in its care and custody
 receive the services they need." (Id., p. 56). One component of this was staff ratios of no
 more than 1:17 for caseloads, "... in order to assure that workers have time to develop
 service plans with the family, to provide the direct assistance needed by the family, and to
 arrange other services according to the service plan ...." (Id., pp. 57, 118).

        Another stated goal was to maintain proper qualification requirements for all staff
in the CFSD. That meant that all persons hired as social workers have a Master's Degree
and that all persons hired or promoted into supervisory social work positions have an MSW
and a minimum of three years' experience in child welfare. (Id., p. 125). Supervisors'
responsibilities were to be defined; and it was suggested that they not carry caseloads except
in emergencies (and only then, for a maximum of two days) and that they only supervise a
unit of five social workers or five social workers and one case aide. (Id., pp. 126, 127).

        Eleven offerors, including Koba, submitted proposals on May 12, 1992. (AR, Exs. 4
and 5). Koba's proposal was, in essence, a plan to implement three preservation units.
(AR, Ex. 5). Schedule 11 of protestor's PRICE PROPOSAL stated: "As previously agreed
to by DHS in recent (August 1991) negotiations for other District contracts, Koba's indirect
rate is bid at 24.00 percent. Refer to Exhibit 5-4, G&A Justification, and Exhibit 5-5, Koba's
Independent Auditor's FY 90 Letter."

       While not stated expressly anywhere in the RFP, the terms of the solicitation
permitted an offeror to submit a proposal for one, two or three family preservation units.
Of the 11 offerors, only Koba and Medical Extension Services, Inc. (MESI) made an offer
to provide three preservation units. (DR, Ex. B; DRO, Answer 1).

        The proposals were initially reviewed between May 12 and July 1, 1992, by three
program staffers. There was no formal technical scoring, and no cost analyses were made.
The reviewers simply determined whether the offers conformed to the RFP requirements
and whether the budgets were reasonable. On July 1, 1992, all offerors were advised in
writing of deficiencies in their proposals. (AR, Exs. 6 and 7). Protestor was told, "Your
proposal indicates start up costs, [sic] the [sic] RFP does not provide start up costs for these
services." (AR, Ex. 6). Each offeror was advised that the budget submitted was acceptable


   lOIOn page 30 of the Plan, it is stated:

       Because this Implementation Plan calls for a number of contracts to help carry out the
       activities, the District will need to expedite these contracts. The Plan requires the
       development by March 31,1992, of written agreements governing the procurements required
       by this Implementation Plan within the time frames identified in the Plan.




                                              3453
[)fgjct   of Columbia Register                                                                                         JUN 1 0 '99~

                                                                 -9-                   CAB No. P·350, Koba Associates, Inc.

               based upon its proposal. (AR, Exs. 6 and 7). The contracting officer also requested a
               BAFO from each offeror by July 8, 1992, which was to include correction of the deficiencies
               identified in the letter, including any necessary changes in the budget. (Id. ).11.1

                     Protestor submitted its BAFO on July 8, 1992. (PEx. 6; AR, Ex. 8).W The BAFO
              consisted of a revised price proposal for the base year and two option years.ur Schedule
              11 of the BAFO contained language regarding the 24% indirect cost rate similar to that
              contained in the initial proposal.

                      Negotiations were held with all offerors between August 11 and 13, 1992. (AR, Exs.
              9 and 10; DRO, Ex. A). William Clemmons headed the negotiation team. At the beginning
              of the negotiation sessions, Clemmons advised all offerors that only their cost proposals
              would be discussed and that their technical proposals had already been evaluated. (Id.).
              With respect to protestor, Clemmons told its representatives that it was his understanding
              that protestor "would do one (1)" preservation unit even though the proposal covered three
              units. Koba representatives stated that they "would do" either, "... but they prefer all
              three." (AR, Ex. 10). At no time during the negotiation session did Clemmons make it clear
              to Koba that it was to submit a proposal for only one family preservation unit. In fact,
              Clemmons stated that he advised Koba to separate its costs for the three units because that
              was the only way to compare its proposal with those submitted for only one unit.

                     Clemmons also discussed Koba's indirect cost rate. He advised the representatives
              that 24% was an excessive amount and unacceptable. He stated that it was "far beyond" that
              of "other vendors we have come in line with." He stated that "true cost" was the best way
              to handle indirect costs and asked protestor to revise its indirect cost rate to make
              "everything cost allocable." Koba was told to submit a BAFO by October 19, 1992.lll
              (AR, Ex. 10).

                     Clemmons also discussed indirect cost rates with the other offerors; and in each
             instance, he told them that their rates were excessive and that those costs should be directly
             allocated to the program. (DR, Ex. A). Clemmons did not advise any offeror as to what
             indirect cost rate the government had established or was willing to accept. Offerors were
             told that their BAFO's were due between August 18 and August 20, 1992, with each offeror
             given a specific date. (Id.).




                ll/All offers were considered to be within the competitive range, according to the contracting officer,
             because the initial idea was to make award without further negotiations.

                llIThe BAPO was entitled "BAFO In Response to JA;92046 Family Preservation," and was labeled
             "Revision 2".

                 llIThere is no explanation in the record as to why Koba submitted a proposal for two, instead of one,
             option years.

                If/This date was a typographical error.



                                                           3454
DiS1rfct of Columbia Register                                                                                          JUN 1 0 19M


                                                                 - 10 -                 CAB No. P·350, Koba Associates, Inc.

                    Protestor's technical proposal (the July 8, 1992, BAFO) had been evaluated by four
             evaluators on July 28 and 29, 1992. The primary criticism among all evaluators was that
             protestor did not have sufficient experience in the area of child welfare. (DR, Ex. A). The
             only reference to this deficiency during the August 12 negotiations was as follows:

                     Mr. Clemmons informed offeror that we were not trying to change their
                     proposal in any way but that [w]e are concerned with the qualifications of
                     staff. We are looking for very experience[d] social workers with a background
                     in family, child and youth services and caseload. Salaries appear to be a little
                     low to get the type of staff we are looking for. ...

             (AR, Ex. 10). Nevertheless, prior to the August 12 negotiations, protestor was ranked
             second technically (on each of three units) of the top three offerors ..!ll It also appears that
             contrary to the information provided to offerors in the August negotiations, their price
             proposals had also been evaluated. (DR, Ex. B).121 Koba received a score of 23.10% for
             all three units. (Id.). MESI was also evaluated for three units and ranked between 29.10%
             and 30%. It initially had the lowest-priced proposal (for one of three units). (ld.). Price
             proposals for the other offerors, except the two excluded, were each ranked for one unit
             because they submitted proposals for only one unit.

                   On August 19, 1992, Koba submitted two BAFO's: one for one family preservation
            unit and the other for three units combined. (AR, Ex. 11). Each was labeled "Revision 3".
            The letter to the contracting officer accompanying the BAFO's stated, in pertinent part:

                     With respect to indirect rates, Koba's proposed indirect rate of 24% is already
                     below its actual incurred rate as reflected on Koba's financial statements. As
                     you know, the District Contract Cost Principles, 27 DCMR 3300 et. [sic] seq.
                     clearly states that indirect rates shall be allocated in accordance with generally
                     accepted accounting principles, consistently applied, and that these costs shall
                     then be allocable to D.C. contracts if they are necessary to the overall
                     operation of the business, although a direct relationship to any particular cost
                     Objective may not be evident. ...


                WKoba was ranked only .20% below the highest-ranked offeror, Progressive Life Center, Inc. (PLCI).
            For Love of Children (FLOC) and Partners on the Right Path (PRP) were not ranked because their option
            year budgets were not included in their BAFO's. (DR, Ex. B). Nevertheless, negotiations were held with
            FLOC and PRP.

                ~In the District Reply, the government provided copies of the summaries of both technical and price
            evaluations at Exhibit B. The first four pages dated "9/17" were the spread sheets containing the ranks of a1l
            offerors, except FLOC and PRP. They should actually be dated August 21, 1992. The last two pages of the
            exhibit, dated "8/21", were the separate cost/price evaluations which were incorporated into the evaluation
            spreadsheet. The two pages following the first four pages appear to be technical and price proposal rankings
            dated August 3, 1992. The three pages following are price proposal rankings performed prior to the August
            11 to 13 negotiations.




                                                             3455
District of Columbia Register                                                                                          JUN 1 0   19M

                                                                 - 11 -                 CAB No. P-350, Koba Associates, Inc.

                    The offers were evaluated and ranked again on or before August 21, 1992. (DR, Ex.
             B). For its technical proposals, Koba ranked 223.30% for one unit, with a price offer of
             $399,048.00 for the base year and $425,765.00 for the option year. For three units, Koba
             was ranked technically at 226.00%, with a price proposal of $1,139,038.00 for the base year
             and $1,232,184.00 for the option year. Again, it ranked second technically of the highest-
             ranked offers. MESI was also evaluated for three family preservation units.!1/

                    By letter dated September 10, 1992, the contracting officer advised all offerors that
             he was re-opening negotiations "... for the limited purpose of requesting revised cost
             proposals." (AR, Ex. 12). Significantly, he stated that negotiations were being re-opened
             "... due to financial constraints ... ," and that contracts could not be awarded based on
             current submissions. He also said:

                     The District intends to award three contracts, one contract to each of the
                     three different offerors whose Best and Final Offer (BAFO) is ranked in the
                     highest ranked combined set of three scores !hat can be accommodated within
                     the total funds available for this project--which is an amount not to exceed $1
                     million.

                     Accordingly, all BAFO's will be rescored and ranked. Then all combinations
                     of three which come under $1 million will be ranked based on the sum of the
                     three component scores. The highest ranked group will be selected ....
                     (emphasis added).

                    It was about this time that the contracting officer became aware that there was a $1
             million limitation on the funds for the procurement.

                   BAFO's were to be submitted by September 14, 1992. However, on September 11,
            1992, the contracting officer advised all offerors that they could also revise their technical
            proposals. (AR, Ex. 13). Consequently, BAFO's were to be submitted by September 16,
            1992.

                   On September 16, 1992, protestor submitted BAFO's for both one and three family
            preservation units. Each was labeled "Revision 4". Upon review by program staffers,
            Clemmons was advised that Koba and PLCI had changed their technical proposals such that
            they were no longer in conformance with the RFP. Clemmons conveyed the information to
            the contracting officer.




                l1/As a result of the August 21, 1992, evaluations, MESI ranked sixth with respect to cost. However, the
            difference between protestor's and MESI's proposals was that for MESI, the cost for each unit offered was the
            same; whereas with Koba, its cost for three units combined could not be broken down in such a way that each
            separate unit had the same amount of costs associated wilh it. (DR, Ex. B).




                                                           3456
District of Columbia Register                                                                                          JUN 10 1994


                                                                 - 12 -                  CAB No. P-350, Koba Associates, Inc.

                   On September 24, 1992, the contracting officer told Clemmons to rescore the offers
             and use the same evaluation team. (AR, Ex. 15). He also said:

                        Provide detailed justification for excluding Progressive Life and KOBA from
                        consideration. This will leave 9 offerors, if I determine that there is adequate
                        basis for excluding Progressive Life and KOBA.

             (Id.).~1


                     Sometime between September 24 and October 1, 1992, four proposals were re-
             evaluated because the BAFO's were revised. (AR, Ex. 15; DR, Ex. A [Revised]). Even
             though Koba and PLCI were to have been excluded, they received combined (technical and
             price) ratings of 220 and 231, respectively, and ranked second and third behind Sasha Bruce
             Youthwork, Inc. ("Sash a Bruce"). Sasha Bruce received the highest score of 254, although
             its technical proposal had consistently ranked third in the August and early September
             evaluations. (DR, Ex. B). The evaluation spreadsheet dated October 1, 1992, stated that
             the offers of Koba and PLCI were excluded. (AR, Ex. 15).

                    Koba's proposal was excluded because of alleged drastic reductions in its technical
            proposal, specifically: (1) the supervisory social worker was going to carry a case load,
            contrary to the RFP requirements; (2) the proposal reduced the estimated caseload from
            80 to 70, below the minimum acceptable; and (3) the proposal reduced the amount
            established for flexible funds. CAR, Ex. 15). PLCI was excluded for similar reasons. (Id.).

                   On or about October 4, 1992, the BAFO's were ranked for the highest combined set
            of three scores which did not exceed $1 million. (AR, Ex. 16).121 Both protestor and PLCI
            were ranked along with the other nine offerors; however, wherever they appeared in the
            "mathematical permutation" developed, their technical scores were not included. (ld.). The
            contracting officer, Ray Singal, was unaware of the details of the October 4 rankings.

                   By letter contracts dated October 27, 1992, awards were made to Sash a Bruce,
            Washington Family Services Associates (WFSA) and Family and Child Services of
            Washington, D.C. (FCS). (AR, Exs. 17A, 17B and 17C). Earlier, by letters dated October
            21, 1992, the remaining offerors were advised that their proposals had not been accepted.
            (AR, Ex. 18).



                WPLCI had the highest-ranked technical proposal as per the August 3 and August 21 evaluations. (DR,
            Ex. B).

                IE/This "mathematical permutation" was allegedly developed by Patricia Watt, Deputy Director, DHS and
            Ray Singal's supervisor. Watt also executed, as the contracting officer, the October 1, 1992, justification for
            excluding Koba and PLCI from competition. There was no explanation of the reasons for Watt's direct
            participation in the procurement.




                                                           3457
District of Columbia Regf9fer                                                                                          JUN 1 0 19M


                                                                 - 13 -                  CAB No. P-350, Koba Associates, Inc.

                   Koba sought a debriefing regarding its proposal, but was told that in view of its
            protest, the District felt that it was best not to provide a debriefing. Koba representatives
            did not know until after the submission of the agency report that protestor had been
            excluded from competition.~1

                    In the August 3 technical evaluations, Sasha Bruce was ranked third behind PLCI and
            Koba. (DR, Ex. B). WFSA was ranked fourth (187.30) and FCS was ranked fifth (159.00).
            (Id.). In the price proposal evaluations made before the August 11 to 13 negotiations, Sasha
            Bruce was ranked sixth, WFSA was ranked fifth and FCS was ranked fourth. (Jd.).

                  In the August 21, 1992, technical and price evaluations, Sasha Bruce was ranked third,
            WFSA was ranked fourth and FCS was ranked fifth. (Id.). Finally, the results of the
            October 1992 evaluations showed that Sasha Bruce was ranked first (254), WFSA was
            ranked fourth (194) and FCS was ranked fifth (168). (Id.).

                   At no time during any of the proposal evaluations were cost analyses performed,
            although costs were discussed with the offerors during the August 1992 negotiations.
            Additionally, fees were discussed with only two offerors; and both were advised that their
            fees were too high. (DR, Ex. A).:lll Furthermore, during the August 1992 negotiations,
            10 offerors were told that their indirect cost rates were too high, even though the District
            had not established an indirect cost rate. lll

                    D.C. Code      §   1-1183.4(b) states:

                             Proposals shall be solicited from the maximum number of qualified
                             sources and in a manner consistent with the nature of and the need for
                             the supplies or services being required, with adequate public notice of
                             the intended procurement pursuant to § 1-1183.3( a).




              22.ISee STATEMENT FROM FRANCES LORENZI REGARDING DEBRIEFING ON KOBA'S
           FAMILY PRESERVATION PROPOSAL AND THE D1STRICf'S PRACfICE REGARDING FIXED
           PRICE VS. COST REIMBURSABLE CONTRACfS, dated May 19, 1993.

               lllrnstitute for Life Enrichment (ILE) and PSI Associates, Inc. (PSI) both proposed a 6% fee. Clemmons
           told ILE that its fee was too high in view of its 31.41 % indirect cost rate. Clemmons told PSI that its fee was
           too high, nothing more. Interestingly, it was a FLOC official who advised Clemmons during negotiations that
           the Internal Revenue Service allowed a 3% fee. During the protest conference, the Board was led to believe
           by Clemmons that the District already knew that the IRS permitted a 3% fee for non-profit organizations.
           Additionally, the majority of the offerors were non-profit organizations and generally do not charge a fee.

               lllSee DR, Ex. A (August 13, 1992, negotiation memorandum, Progressive Life Center, Inc.).




                                                             3458
District of Columbia Register                                                                                 JUN 1 0 1994


                                                          - 14 -               CAB No. P·350, Koba Associates, Inc.

                    Subsections (c) and (d) state:

                            The request for proposals shall indicate the relative importance of each
                            evaluation factor, including price.

                            Every request for proposals shall include a statement of work which
                            shall be used as a basis for the evaluation of proposals.

                    Subsection (e) of the provision states, in pertinent part:

                            Any written or oral negotiations shall be conducted with all responsible
                            offerors in the competitive range. These negotiations may not disclose
                            any information derived from proposals submitted by competing
                            offerors ....

                    Subsection (f) states, in pertinent part:

                           ... [A]ward of the contract shall be made to the responsible offeror
                           whose proposal is determined to be the most advantageous to the
                           District government, considering price and the evaluation factors set
                           forth in the request for proposals ....

                  Title 27 of the District of Columbia Municipal Regulations CDCMR) (July 1988)
            governs contracts and procurements. Chapter 16 therein governs procurements by
            competitive proposals. Section 1602 of 27 DCMR is applicable to the solicitation of
            proposals.

                   Section 1602.2 states:

                           The contracting officer shall issue written solicitations which contain all
                           information necessary to enable prospective contractors to prepare
                           proposals properly.

                   Section 1602.3 states:

                           The contracting officer shall furnish identical information concerning
                           a proposed procurement to all prospective contractors receiving the
                           RFP.

                  Section 1607 of 27 DCMR is applicable to amendments to requests for proposals.
           Section 1607.1 states, in pertinent part:




                                                      3459
District of Columbia Register                                                                                   JUN 1 0 1994


                                                           - 15 -                CAB No. P-350, Koba Associates, Inc.

                    After issuance of a solicitation, but before the date set for receipt of
                    proposals, the contracting officer may make changes in the solicitation to
                    reflect the following:

                            (a)    Significant changes in quantity, specifications, or delivery
                                   schedules;

                            (b)    The correction of defects or ambiguities; ...

                    Section 1614 of 27 DCMR governs source selection. Section 1614.1 states:

                            Selection of a contractor through the use by means of CSP's~1 shall
                            be based on the following:

                            (a)    Cost or price competition between proposals that meet the
                                   District's minimum requirements stated in the solicitation; or


                            (b)    Competition involving an evaluation and comparison of cost or
                                   price and other factors. (emphasis added).

                    Section 1615 of 27 DCMR applies to changes in the government's requirements.

                    Section 1615.1 states:

                           When, either before or after receipt of proposals, the District increases,
                           decreases, or otherwise changes its requirements, the contracting
                           officer shall issue a written amencment to the solicitation, in
                           accordance with § 1607.

                   Section 1615.2 states, in pertinent part:

                           In deciding which firms to notify of a change, the contracting officer
                           shall consider the state in the procurement cycle at which the change
                           occurs and the magnitude of the change, as follows:

                                                           ***
                           (c)    If the competitive range has been established, the amendment
                                  shall be sent only to those offerors within the competitive range.




               lil"CSP" means "competitive sealed proposal." 27 DCMR § 1602.1.




                                                      3460
District of Columbia Register                                                                                 JUN 1 0 19M


                                                            - 16 -               CAB No. P-350, Koba Associates, Inc.

                    Section 1615.3 states:

                             If a change is so substantial that it warrants complete revision of a
                             solicitation, the contracting officer shall cancel the original solicitation
                             and issue a new one, regardless of the state of the procurement. The
                             new solicitation shall be issued to all firms originally solicited and to
                             any firms added to the original list, and shall be advertised in
                             accordance with the requirements of this title.

                   Section 1617 of 27 DCMR covers the evaluation factors for proposals. In its entirety,
            that section states:

                    1617.1          The evaluation factors that will be considered in evaluating
                                    proposals shall be tailored to each procurement and shall
                                    include only those factors that will have an impact on the source
                                    selection decision.

                    1617.2          The contracting officer shall include in the solicitation the
                                    evaluation factors, including price or cost and any signficiant
                                    sub-factors.    The solicitation shall include the minimum
                                    requirements that apply to particular evaluation factors or
                                    significant sub-factors.

                    1617.3          The contracting officer may include in the solicitation the
                                    numerical weights which may be used in the evaluation
                                    of the proposals.

                   1617.4           Evaluation factors shall be stated in descending order of
                                    importance.

                   1617.5          Price or cost to the District shall be included as an
                                   evaluation factor in each RFP.

                   1617.6          While the lowest price or lowest total cost to the District
                                   may be an important or even a deciding factor in most
                                   source selections, the District may select the source
                                   whose proposal offers the greatest value to the District
                                   in terms of technical merit and other factors.

                   1617.7          When awarding a cost-reimbursement contract, the cost
                                   proposal shall not be controlling. The contracting officer
                                   shall consider which offeror can perform the contract in
                                   a manner most advantageous to the District as
                                   determined by evaluation of proposals according to the
                                   established evaluation criteria.



                                                      3461
District of Columbia Register                                                                                JUN 1 0 1994


                                                        - 17 -               CAB No. P-350, Koba Associates, Inc.

                    Section 1618 of 27 DCMR governs proposal evaluation. Sections 1618.1 through
             1618.5 state:

                    1618.1       The contracting officer shall evaluate each proposal in
                                 accordance with the evaluation criteria in the solicitation.


                    1618.2      The contracting officer shall evaluate the cost estimate
                                or price, not only to determine whether it is reasonable,
                                but also to determine the offeror's understanding of the
                                work and ability to perform the contract.

                    1618.3      The contracting officer shall document the cost or price
                                evaluation.

                    1618.4      If any technical evaluation is necessary beyond ensuring
                                that the proposal meets the miminum requirements in
                                the solicitation, the contracting officer shall forward the
                                proposals to the appropriate technical official for
                                technical evaluation.

                    1618.5      If a technical evaluation is done, a technical evaluation
                                report shall be prepared by the technical official and
                                shall contain the following:

                                (a)    The basis for evaluation;

                                (b)    An analysis of the technically acceptable and
                                       unacceptable proposals, including an assessment
                                       of each offeror's ability to accomplish the
                                       technical requirements;

                                (c)    A summary, matrix, or quantitative ranking of
                                       each technical proposal in relation to the best
                                       rating possible; and

                                (d)    A summary of findings.

                  Section 1619 of 27 DCMR applies to discussions with offerors. Sections 1619.1 and
           1619.2 state:

                   1619.1       The contracting officer shall conduct written or oral
                                discussions with all offerors in the competitive range,
                                except in the following circumstances:




                                                  3462
District of Columbia Register                                                                                JUN 1 0 1994


                                                        - 18 -                CAB No. P-350, Koba Associates, Inc.

                                 (a)    If prices are fixed by law or regulation; or

                                 (b)    If it can be clearly demonstrated from the
                                        existence of full and open competition or
                                        accurate prior cost experience with the product or
                                        service that acceptance of the most favorable
                                        initial proposal without discussion would result in
                                        the lowest overall cost to the District at a fair and
                                        reasonable price.

                    1619.2      If discussions are held with offerors, the contracting
                                office[r] shall determine which proposals are in the
                                competitive range, and shall conduct written or oral
                                discussions with the offerors who submitted those
                                proposals.

                   Section 1620 of 27 DCMR applies to the determination of the competitive range.
            That section states, in its entirety:

                    1620.1      The competitive range shall be determined on the basis
                                of cost or price and other factors, in accordance with the
                                evluation [sic] criteria that were stated in the solicitation,
                                and shall include all proposals that have a reasonable
                                chance of being selected for award.

                   1620.2       If there is doubt as to whether a proposal is in the
                                competitive range, the proposal shall be included .

                   1620.3       The contracting officer shall notify, in writing, an
                                unsuccessful offeror at the earliest practicable time that
                                its proposal is no longer being considered for award.

                 Section 1621 governs the conduct of discussions with offerors. Sections 1621.1, 1621.2
           and 1621.3 state:

                   1621.1       The contracting officer shall ensure that, if discussions
                                are held with any offeror within the competitive range,
                                discussions are held with all offerors in the competitive
                                range.

                   1621.2       During discussion[ s] with offerors, the contracting officer
                                shall do the following:

                                (a)    Control all discussions;




                                                   3463
DIstrict of Corumbia Register                                                                                    JUN 1 0 1~


                                                            - 19 -                CAB No. P-350, Koba Associates, Inc.

                                     (b)     Advise the offeror of deficiencies in its proposal
                                             so that the offeror is given an opportunity to
                                             satisfy the District's requirements;


                                    ( c)     Attempt to resolve any uncertainties concerning
                                             the technical proposal and other terms and
                                             conditions of the proposal;

                                    (d)    Resolve any suspected mistakes by calling them
                                           to the offeror's attention as specifically as possible
                                           without disclosing information concerning other
                                           offerors' proposals or the evaluation process; and

                                    (e)    Provide the offeror a reasonable opportunity to
                                           submit any cost or price, technical, or other
                                           revisions to its proposal that may result from the
                                           discussions.

                    1621.3          The contracting officer shall not assist an offeror to bring
                                    its proposal up to the level of other proposals through
                                    successive rounds of discussion, such as pointing out
                                    weaknesses resulting from the offeror's lack of diligence,
                                    competence, or inventiveness in preparing the proposal.

                    Section 1621.5 states:

                             The contracting officer shall not indicate to an offeror a cost or price
                             it must meet to obtain further consideration, advise an offeror of its
                             standing relative to another offeror, or otherwise furnish information
                             about any other offeror's prices.

                    BAFO's are governed by 27 DCMR           §   1622. In its entirety, that section states:

                    1622.1         Upon completion of discussions, the contracting officer
                                   shall issue to all offerors within the competitive range a
                                   request for best and final offers.

                   1622.2          The request for best and final offers shall include the
                                   following:

                                   (a)     Notice that discussions are concluded;




                                                        3464
District of Columbia Register                                                                             JUN 1 0 199'


                                                        - 20 -              CAB No. P-350, Koba Associates, Inc.



                                 (b)    Notice that this is the opportunity to submit a
                                        best and final offer;

                                 (c)    A common cut-off date and time that allows a
                                        reasonable opportunity for submission of written
                                        best and final offers; and

                                (d)    Notice that if any modification is submitted, it
                                       must be received by the date and time specified
                                       and is subject to the provisions of this chapter
                                       covering late proposals.

                    1622.3      After receipt of best and final offers, the contracting
                                officer shall not reopen discussions unless it is clearly in
                                the best interest of the District to do so.

                    1622.4      Reasons for reopening discussions may include, but are
                                not limited to, the fact that it is clear that information
                                available at the time is inadequate to reasonably justify
                                contractor selection and award based on the best and
                                final offers received.

                    1622.5      If discussions are reopened, the contracting officer shall
                                issue an additional request for best and final offers to all
                                offerors within the competitive range.

                    1622.6      After evaluation of the best and final offers, the
                                contracting officer shall select that source whose best
                                and final offer is most advantageous to the District,
                                considering only price and other factors included in the
                                solicitation.

                   1622.7       The contracting officer shall prepare supporting
                                documentation for the selection decision that shows that
                                relative differences among the proposals and their
                                strengths, weaknesses, and risks in terms of the
                                evaluation factors. The supporting documentation shall
                                include the basis for the selection. (emphasis added).

                   Cost analyses of proposals are governed by 27 DCMR § 1626. Section 1626.1 states,
           in pertinent part:




                                                  3465
District of Columbia Register                                                                                JUN 1 0 19M


                                                           - 21 -               CAB No. P-350, Koba Associates, Inc.

                     The contracting officer shall be required to perform a cost analysis in either
                     of the following circumstances:

                     (a)      The award of any contract in excess of five hundred thousand
                              dollars ($500,000); ...

                     Sections 1626.2 through 1626.6 state:

                     1626.2         When cost analysis is required, the contracting officer
                                    shall perform cost analysis by using the techniques and
                                    procedures set forth in this section.

                     1626.3         The contracting officer shall verify cost or pricing date
                                    [sic] and evaluate the cost elements, including the
                                    following:

                                    (a)    The necessity for and reasonableness of the
                                           proposed cost, including allowances for
                                           contingencies;

                                    (b)    A projection of the offeror's cost trends on the
                                           basis of current and historical cost or pricing data;

                                    (c)   A technical appraisal of the estimated labor,
                                          material, tooling, and facilities requirements and
                                          of the reasonableness of scrap and spoilage
                                          factors; and

                                    (d)   The application of audited or negotiated indirect
                                          cost rates, labor rates, and other factors.

                    1626.4         The contracting officer shall evaluate the effect of the
                                   offeror's current practices on future costs. In conducting
                                   this evaluation, the contracting officer shall ensure that
                                   the effects of inefficient or uneconomical past practices
                                   are not projected into the future.

                    1626.5         The contracting officer shall compare the costs proposed
                                   by the offeror for individual cost elements with the
                                   following:

                                   (a)    Actual costs previously incurred by the same
                                          offeror;




                                                     3466
IMtct of Columbia Register                                                                                        JUN 1 0 199'


                                                               - 22 -               CAB No. P-350, Koba Associates, Inc.

                                         (b)   Previous cost estimates from the offeror or from
                                               other offerors for the same or similar items;

                                         (c)   Other cost estimates received in response to the
                                               District's request;

                                         (d)   Independent District cost estimates by technical
                                               personnel; and

                                        (e)    Forecasts or planned expenditures.

                     1626.6             The contracting officer shall verify that the offeror's cost
                                        submissions are in accordance with the contract cost
                                        principles and procedures set forth in chapter 33 of this
                                        title. (emphasis added).

                     "Cost analysis" is defined as:

                              . . . the review and evaluation of the separate cost elements and
                              proposed profit of an offeror's or contractor's cost or pricing data and
                              the judgmental factors applied in projecting from the data to the
                              estimated costs, in order to form an opinion on the degree to which the
                              proposed costs represent what the contract should cost, assuming
                              reasonable economy and efficiency.

           27 DCMR       §    1699.1.

                     Section 1215 of 27 DCMR governs indirect cost rates. In its entirety, that section
           states:

                     1215.1             The establishment of final indirect cost rates shall
                                        provide the following:

                                        (a)    Uniformity of approach with a contractor when
                                               more than one (1) contract or agency is involved;

                                        (b)    Economy of administration; and

                                        (c)    Timely settlement under cost-reimbursement
                                               contracts.

                     1215.2         Billing rates shall be established as a method for interim
                                    reimbursement of indirect costs at estimated rates
                                    subject to adjustment during contract performance and
                                    at the time the final indirect cost rates are established.



                                                          3467
                                                                                                       JUN 1 0 '994

                                                    - 23 -               CAB No. P-350, Koba Associates, Inc.

            1215.3           The Director shall be responsible for establishing indirect
                             cost rates for each contractor. These rates shall be
                             binding on all agencies and their contracting offices,
                             unless otherwise specifically prohibited by statute.

            1215.4          Billing rates and final indirect cost rates shall be used in
                            reimbursing indirect costs under cost-reimbursement
                            contracts and in determining progress payments under
                            fixed-price contracts. (emphasis added).

        Section 3300 of 27 DCMR contains the cost principles applicable to District of
Columbia procurements.W Section 3300.3 requires that cost principles be used, inter alia:
(1) in the pricing or estimation of costs in contracts based on other than competitive sealed
bidding; and (2) in determining allowability of costs under contract provisions which provide
for reimbursement of costs}~/ Sections 3312 and 3313 cover direct and indirect costs,
respectively. Section 3313.4 provides in part that the contracting officer shall examine a
contractor's method of allocating indirect costs when:

            (1)      A substantial difference exists between the cost patterns of work
                     performed under the contract and the contractor's other work;

        (2)          A significant change occurs in the nature of the contractor's business; ...
                     or

        (3)       Indirect cost groups developed for a contractor's primary location are
                  applied to off-site locations ....


DECISION

Change In Scope Of WorkINotification To Offerors

        The RFP was for the procurement of three (3) community home-based family service
units. Section 8.19.1 of the RFP stated that the government would award one or more
contracts to the responsible offeror whose offer, conforming to the solicitation, would be
most advantageous to the District, considering cost or price, technical and other factors.
Section E.1 of the RFP reiterated that the contract would be awarded to the responsible
offeror whose offer was the most advantageous to the District, based upon the evaluation
factors contained in the solicitation.



   UlCost principles were made applicable to this procurement pursuant to section 0.1 of the RFP.

   25/See   also, 27 DCMR § 3300.2.




                                                3468
District of Columbia Register                                                                          JUN 1 0 1994

                                                       - 24 -             CAB No. P-350, Koba Associates, Inc.

                   Section E.3 of the RFP set forth the manner in which price would be evaluated and
            provided a formula for the determination of the lowest price.

                   On May 12, 1992, protestor and 10 other offerors submitted proposals. Koba's
            proposal encompassed three family service units, as did that of MESI. Nine offerors
            submitted proposals for only one family service unit. After receipt of proposals, the
            contracting officer determined all offerors to be in the competitive range; and on July 1,
            1992, he notified them of the particular deficiencies in their proposals and called for
            submission of BAFO's. Protestor's and MESI's BAFO's covered three family service units;
            but their technical and cost proposals were evaluated on the basis of both one and three
            units. All other proposals were evaluated on the basis of one unit.

                   During the August 1992 negotiations with DHS, Koba was told that it was DHS'
            understanding that protestor "would do" one unit, with protestor responding that it "would
            do" one or three units, but preferred three. Thereafter, on August 19, 1992, Koba submitted
            BAFO's for one and three units. MESI's BAFO, after the August 1992, negotiations, also
            covered three units.

                   After the August 1992 BAFO's were evaluated, the contracting officer advised all
            offerors by letter dated September 10, 1992, that he was re-opening negotiations for the
            purpose of submitting revised cost proposals. In the letter, he stated:

                   The District intends to award three contracts, one to each of three different
                   offerors whose Best and Final Offer (BAFO) is ranked in the highest
                   combined set of three scores that can be accommodated within... an amount
                   not to exceed $1 million. . . . (emphasis added).

           The contracting officer went on to say that BAFO's would be re-scored and ranked and

                   ... [t]hen all combinations of three which come under $] million will be
                   ranked based on the sum of three component scores. The highest ranked
                   group will be selected. . . . (emphasis added).

                   Protestor claimed that by virtue of the August 1992 discussions and the contracting
           officer's September 10, 1992, letter, there was a substantial change made in the RFP
           requirements, in that the RFP required proposals for only one family service unit, as
           opposed to three. Koba also claimed that the basis for award was altered because an
           offeror proposing three units at costs below the combined cost for three different offerors
           would not be considered for award.

                  In order to determine whether a substantial change was made, we look to the
           requirements and language of the RFP. Here, we need not make too deep an analysis
           because the procuring agency admitted that the language of the RFP was ambiguous in that
           an offeror could have submitted a proposal which encompassed one, two or three family
           preservation units. In our view, the RFP requirements were both ambiguous and misleading.




                                                  3469
District of Columbia Register                                                                              JUM 1 0 '99'

                                                            - 25 -           CAB No. P-350, Koba Associates, Inc.



                    A solicitation is ambiguous when it is susceptible to two or more reasonable
                    interpretations. Energy Maintenance CO/p., B-223328, Aug. 27,1986,86-2 CPD
                    ~ 234. Although a bidder's particular interpretation need not be the most
                    reasonable one for a finding of ambiguity, that bidder's interpretation of the
                    language of the solicitation at issue must be reasonable. TUMIIIlt'l, Inc., B-
                    235348, Aug. 24, 1989, 89-2 CPD ~ 174. To be reasonable, an interpretation
                    must be consistent with the solicitation, read as a whole and in a reasonable
                    manner. Vitro Servs. Corp., B-233040, Feb. 9, 1989, 89-1 CPD ~ 136. When
                    a dispute exists as to the actual meaning of a solicitation requirement, we will
                    resolve the dispute by reading the solicitation as a whole and in a manner that
                    gives effect to all its provisions. TUMI Int'l, Inc., B-235348, supra.

            Drs Services, Inc., B-240623, December 5, 1990, 90-2 CPD ~ 459. See FirstPage of Virginia,
            B-243747, August 2, 1991,91-2 CPO ~ 121; Loral Ten·acorn; Marconi Italimza, B-224908, B-
            224908.2,66 Compo Gen. 272 (1987).

                   If one is to believe that the September 10, 1992, letter from the contracting officer
            was an amendment to the RFP, when both Koba and MESI submitted proposals for three
            family preservation units in May 1992, the contracting officer should have known that
            something was amiss, because there was obvious confusion among the bidders. See Baytex
            Communication, Inc., B-237183, February 8,1990,90-1 CPD ~ 164. Nevertheless, Koba and
            MESI were both considered responsive to the RFP as reflected in the fact that they were
            determined to be within the competitive range and by the fact that BAFO's were sought
            from them on July 1, 1992. Additionally, protestor's July 8 BAFO for three units was
            evaluated both technically and for cost and was ranked second among the top three offerors.

                   However, it was not until the August 1992 discussions that Koba was advised orally,
            in vague and uncertain terms, that OHS wanted a proposal for only one family preservation
            unit; but again, DHS accepted, without comment, BAFO's from Koba for one and three
            preservation units. The final determination of the agency's needs did not come until
            September 1992, when the contracting officer informed all offerors that three separate
            contracts would be awarded to three different offerors and requested a third round of
            BAFO's.

                   The contracting officer stated in his September 10, 1992, letter that "financial
           constraints" led him to issue the letter because awards could not be made on current
           submissions. However, as of January 1992, the contracting officer knew, or should have
           known, that only $1 million was available for the procurement. Additionally, the contracting
           officer's rationale of assurance of continuity of services in making awards to three different
           offerors is unsupportable because potential problems with continuity of services could arise
           no matter how many (or few) separate awards were made. Furthermore, as of August 21,
           1992, the only offeror of the top three whose proposed cost for three units was over $1
           million was protestor; and the proposed costs combined for all of the top three offerors W


               ~/Using Koba's cost proposal for one unit.



                                                        3470
District ot Columbia Register                                                                                        JUN 1 0 '9M

                                                                - 26 -                 CAB No. P-350, Koba Associates, Inc.

             was $1.15 milIionP'

                   Thus, in our view, by deciding to award three separate contracts to three different
            offerors (whose combined costs were $1 million or less), the procuring agency wanted to be
            sure that it received proposals of $1 million or less combined, and therefore made a
            substantial change to the RFP requirements which had a signficant effect on preparation of
            proposals and the evaluations for award. However, what did not change was the
            requirement for three family preservation units.

                   This determination, however, does not dispose of the issue. It is a fundamental
            principle of procurement that a contracting agency must treat all offerors equally and that
            they must be furnished with identical statements of the agency's requirements in order to
            provide a common ground for preparation and submission of competitive proposals. Loral
            Te"acom; Marconi Italiana, supra . See 27 DCMR § § 1602.2 and 1602.3. Therefore, when
            an agency's needs change so that a material discrepancy is created between the RFP's stated
            requirements and the agency's needs and/or the ground rules for conducting the
            procurement, the RFP should be amended in writing and all within the competitive range
            be given an opportunity to revise their proposals accordingly. [d .

                    In this regard, Koba was informed during discussions that DHS thought it "would do"
            one family preservation unit; and that if protestor submitted a proposal for three units, its
            costs for each unit within the three should be broken down so as to enable an accurate
            comparison of proposals. At this point, DHS should have issued a written amendment to
            the RFP. Yet, despite this failure, it appears that protestor was not prejudiced because it
            subsequently submitted a BAFO for one unit, as well as one for three units. Thus, in our
            opinion, an offeror is not prejudiced, despite the agency's failure to issue a written
            amendment, when the agency informs the offeror during negotiations of any changed
            requirements, regardless of any resulting inconsistency with the terms of the RFP. Ram
            Enterprises, Inc., B-221924, June 24, 1986, 86-1 CPD ~ 581. Cf Loral Te"acom; Marconi
            Italiana, supra.

                   Furthermore, in September 1992, the contracting officer did advise all offerors of a
           change in its needs; and Koba submitted a BAFO accordingly. At this point, all offerors
           were competing on a common and equal basis. See 27 DCMR § § 1607, 1615.1, 1615.2,
           1615.3; Professional Services Unlimited, Inc., B-245453, December 30, 1991, 92-1 CPD 1r 18.
           Cf Baytex Communication, Inc., supra. With respect to the September 10, 1992, letter itself,
           we believe that it is beyond cavil that it was an amendment to the RFP. This is so because
           it changed significantly the basis for award. Furthermore, the letter was furnished to all
           offerors in the competitive range; and the information contained therein was binding on all
           of them. Thus, that no formal amendment was issued is of no moment because protestor
           clearly understood the letter's import and acted accordingly. See Ingersoll-Rand, B-225996,
           May 5, 1987, 87-1 CPD ~ 474.



               llIMESI's total cost for three units was $989,601.00. However, it was offering the same cost for each unit
           separately.



                                                           3471.
District of Columbia Register                                                                              JUN 1 0 1994

                                                         - 27 -              CAB No. P-350, Koba Associates, Inc.

                     Consequently, our view is that while there was clearly a signficant change in the
             manner in which the procurement was to be conducted, and while the contracting officer
             knew or should have known of the existence of an ambiguity and the need for clarification
             long before September 1992, his issuance of the September 10 letter, and the negotiator's
             earlier disclosure, placed all offerors on an equal footing, such that protestor was afforded
             an opportunity to meet the agency's technical and cost requirements. Thus, we find no
             prejudice to Koba in this regard and will not disturb the procurement on the basis of
             changed requirements and notice thereof. See Honeywell bzjonnafioll Systems, Inc., B-
             191212, July 14, 1978 (unpub.).


             Discussion With Offerors

                    The facts show that discussions with all offerors occurred after receipt and evaluation
            of July 8, 1992, BAFO's; and there is no dispute that the first round of BAFO's was
            requested prior to discussions. Protestor claimed that requests for BAFO's before any
            discussions were conducted was violative of 27 DCMR § § 1621.2 and 1621.3. Koba claimed
            further that the August 1992 discussions were improper because they concerned alleged
            deficiencies of which it was not apprised prior to July 1, 1992.

                    Here, the regulations are clear that the contracting officer is not required to hold
            discussions with offerors prior to issuing a request for BAPO's. 27 DCMR § 1621.1.
            However, if he or she does so, the discussions must be held with all offerors in the
            competitive range. Id. The facts adequately demonstrate that discussions were held with
            all offerors in the competitive range between August 11 and 13, 1992, concerning the
            BAFO's submitted on July 8, 1992. See also 27 DCMR § § 1619.1 and 1619.2.

                  The problem arises here, however, as to whether the discl1ssions with the offerors
            were meaningful and conducted in conformance with the applicable regulations. In
            conjunction with this issue, the question arises as to whether the proposal evaluations were
            made in such a way as to make the discussions meaningful.

                   For discussions in a negotiated procurement to be meaningful, contracting
                   agencies must advise offerors in the competitive range of deficiencies in their
                   proposals and afford them the opportunity to correct the deficiencies by
                   submitting revised proposals. (citations omitted). Agencies need not afford
                   offerors all-encompassing discussions, or discuss every element of a technically
                   acceptable proposal that received less than the maximum possible rating;
                   rather, agencies need only lead offerors into the areas of their proposal which
                   require amplification. (citation omitted).

            Signal Corporation, B-241849.2, B-241849.3, February 26, 1991, 91-1 CPD        ~   218.

                  For our analysis here, we must emphasize that DHS contemplated award of a cost-
            reimbursement contract. Consequently,




                                                     3472
DiStrict of Columbia Register                                                                                              JUN 1 0 1994


                                                                   - 28 -                  CAB No. P-350, Koba Associates, Inc.

                      [w]hen an agency evaluates proposals for the award of a cost reimbursement
                      contract, the offerors' proposed estimated costs of contract performance are
                      not considered as controlling, since they may not provide valid indicatives of
                      the actual costs which the government is, within certain limits, required to pay.
                      . . . (citation omitted).

            Signal Corporation, supra; United Engineers & COllStnlctors, Inc. Steams-Rogers Division, B-
            240691, B-240691.2, December 14, 1990, 90-2 CPD 11 490. As a result, the agency must
            conduct a cost realism analysis to determine the extent to which an offeror's proposed costs
            represent what the contract should cost, assuming reasonable economy and efficiency. Id.
            Evaluated costs provide a sounder basis for determining the most advantageous proposal to
            the government. Polaris, IIlC., B-220066, December 16, 1985, 85-2 CPD 11 669. Because a
            cost realism analysis is a judgment matter on the part of the agency, our review is limited
            to a determination of whether the agency's cost evaluation was reasonably based and was
            not arbitr:::':-j, capricious and in violation of statute and regulation. {d.; PTL Environmental
            Services, B-23OO70, May 27, 1988, 88-1 CPD 11 504.

                    Our review of the record leads us to conclude that the cost evaluations were
            performed so improperly that no meaningful discussions were (or could have been)
            conducted with any of the offerors. The facts demonstrate that the only thing the agency
            did here was to compare the cost proposals to its own questionable estimate of what the
            effort should cost;~1 and while discussions covered cost matters, no meaningful cost or
            price analyses were performed.~1

                    Furthermore, with respect to indirect cost rates, the record is abundantly clear that
            the agency had not established an acceptable rate ceiling and did not even understand the
            bases for the offerors' indirect rates. This position is supported by the fact that the chief
            negoti~tor attempted to force offerors to change their indirect costs to direct costs solely
            allocable to the procurement. Here, the agency should have either conducted audits of the
            indirect cost rates or used other appropriate cost analysis techniques. See 27 DCMR § §
            1626.2 through 1626.6. None of that was done here.~/


                l§.IWe believe that the so-called cost analysis prepared in January 1992 had no basis in fact; or if there was
            a basis, it was not presented to the Board. In fact, we tried to compare the estimate to the recommended costs
            set out in the LaShawn A . Implementation Plan, but that effort was unavailing.

               ~/In April 1992, the RFP was amended to advise offerors that the resulting contract would be a cost
           reimbursement contract. CAR, Ex. 2). However, section E.3 of the RFP was not modified accordingly because
           the evaluation of proposals remained based on price, not cost, for both the base and option years. Clearly,
           the procurement officials did not properly account for this Change.

               HlfSee also sections D.1 and D.2 of the RFP. Furthermore, Koba had, in April and August 1992, entered
           into fixed price contracts with DHS for similar services. Curiously. Ray Singal was the contracting officer for
           those procurements. See fn. 2, supra. None of these contracts were considered in evaluating protestor's
           proposals. See DCMR §§ 1626.2 to 1626.6, supra.




                                                            3473
District of Columbia Register                                                                                             JUN , 0   199~


                                                                   - 29 -                  CAB No. P·350, Koba Associates, Inc.

                     As we held in Koba Associates, Inc., CAB Nos. P-344 and P-359, March 3, 1993, 5
             P.D. 5036 and Koba Associates, Inc., CAB No. P-325, March 12, 1993, 5 P.D. 5056, a
             contracting agency is free to use any reasonable ceiling when evaluating proposals for the
             purpose of cost realism analyses. Further, establishment of a ceiling on any cost element
             is not iIlegalper se. See PTL Environmental Services, supra; United Engineers & Constructors,
             Inc., supra. However, where, as here, no indirect cost rate was established and where the
             agency tried to persuade offerors to change indirect costs to direct costs, the actions of the
             agency were improper and made a mockery of the discussions)!!

                     In addition, protestor contended that because DHS attempted to force it to re-
             allocate its indirect costs (thereby changing its indirect cost rate), the agency engaged in
             impermissible technical leveling. Technical leveling happens when an agency assists an
             offeror in !:Iringing its proposal up to the level of other proposals through successive rounds
             of discussions and discloses weaknesses in a proposal due to a lack of diligence, competence
             or ingenuity in preparing a proposal. United Engineers & Constnlctors, Inc., supra; Loral
             Terracom; Marconi Italiana, supra, fn. 3. Based upon our review of the record, there is no
             evidence that such a situation occurred; for there was only one round of discussions with all
             offerors, 10 of whom were advised that their indirect cost rates were too high compared to
             the government's nonexistent cost rate ceiling.

                    In our view, the cost evaluations and resultant cost discussions were improperly
            conducted and violative of law and regulation because no indirect cost rate was established,
            no cost analyses or cost realism analyses were performed; and the government failed to avail
            itself of the resources upon which to make an informed judgment as to the reasonableness,
            allocability and allowability of the offerors' proposed costS.;g1


            Exclusion From Competitive Range

                   After BAFO's were submitted as a result of the contracting officer's September 10,
            1992, letter, the agency determined that Koba and PLCI had changed their technical
            proposals so as to make them noncompliant with the material requirements of the RFP. For
            Koba, its proposal failed to meet the requirements of sections e.3, e. 7.3 and e.8.1 of the
            scope of services.

                  Section e.3 estimated that 80 families should be served by each community home-
            based facility. This estimate was comparable to the proposed staff ratio set out in the
            LaShawn A. Implementation Plan, which suggested a 1:17 ratio for social worker




                31/There is nothing in the regulations which gives the contracting officer the authority to establish indirect
            cost rates. 27 DCMR § 1215.3. See Koba Associates, Inc., CAB No. P-325, supra .

               32/Cost analyses should have been done in any event because awards under this procurement were over
           S500,OOO.OO. 27 DCMR § 1626.1.


                                                             3474
District 01 Columbia Register                                                                                           JUN 10 1994

                                                                 - 30 -                  CAB No. P·350, Koba Associates, Inc.

             caseloads.lll This recommendation was made "... in order to assure that workers have
             time to develop service plans with the family, to provide the direct assistance needed by the
             family, and to arrange other services according to the service plan . . .. " (Conf.Supp. Ex. 2,
             pp. 57, 118). When this requirement is viewed in conjunction with the LaSlzawn A. court's
             mandate, protestor's reduction of the caseload for MSW's did indeed make its BAFO
             noncompliant with a material requirement of the RFP.

                     The same is true with respect to protestor's noncompliance with section e.8.1. That
             section required one MSW supervisor and five MSW's. This comported with the Plan, which
             suggested that supervisors not carry caseloads except in emergencies. That Koba's BAFO
             stated that its supervisors would carry a caseload was clearly not in compliance with the RFP
             requirements)~1

                     Furthermore, while the Board initially had difficulty understanding the contracting
             officer's instructions to the District's chief negotiator (AR, Ex. 15), consideration of all of
             the evidence leads us to conclude that Koba's (and PLCI's) exclusion from the competitive
             range was justified.~

                    The record of this matter shows that protestor was not aware of its exclusion from
            the competitive range until after it received the agency report. Indeed, when it requested
            a debriefing, Koba was told that in view of its protest, it was better that a debriefing not be
            held. While we are unaware of any law or regulation that prohibits a debriefing in the face
            of a protest, and even if we assume that DHS improperly failed to notify protestor of its
            exclusion from the competitive range, this omission was a procedural defect which did not
            affect the validity of the awards and does not provide a basis for sustaining the protest.
            RDA Intemational, Inc., B-244271.2, December 9, 1991, 91-2 CPD ~ 526.


            Conclusion

                    There is no doubt in our minds that under all of the facts and circumstances, DHS
            did the best that it could with the instant procurement. Clearly, at the time the RFP was
            issued, DHS was very much behind schedule in its compliance with the LaShawn A. Order
            and Plan. Additionally, the contracting officer was clearly not aware of certain significant
            matters, e.g., $1 million limitation on funds which, if nothing else, led to initial confusion



               lllIf each facility required five MSW's, and each MSW carried a caseload of 17, the total number of
            families served would have been 85.

                :WBecause of ambiguity in the language in section C. 7.3 of the RFP regarding flexible funds, we are unable
            to determine whether the $300.00 allocated per family was a material RFP requirement.

               lllAfter Koba and PLCI were excluded from the competitive range, they should not have been evaluated
           at all. That they were evaluated (on their costs alone) in combination with other offerors' technical and cost
           ratings raises a question in our minds as to the mathematical validity of the final ran kings and resultant
           validity of the awards. (AR, Ex. 16). However, we will leave the matter alone, with the caveat that such
           actions give rise to the appearance of an impropriety which should, in the future, be avoided.



                                                           3475
District of Columbia Register                                                                               JUN 1 0 19M

                                                        - 31 -               CAB No. P-350, Koba Associates, Inc.

            among the offerors as well as a delayed substantial change in the RFP requirements.
            Nevertheless, because Koba was made aware of the changes in the agency's needs and
            responded accordingly, it was not prejudiced by the agency's actions.

                    In spite of this position, the procurement remained flawed as a result of the procuring
            officials' failure to use the proper techniques to be used in evaluating cost proposals. From
            the record of this case, we do not know whether proper cost evaluations and cost analyses
            would have resulted in an award to Koba. We do know that the failure to conduct proper
            cost evaluations was unreasonable and arbitrary and, as stated earlier, violated the law.
            Indeed, in our view, no awards should have been made under the RFP. See Commercial
            Energies, Inc.--Recon. and Declaration of Entitlement to Costs, B-243718, B-243718.2,
            December 3, 1991, 91-2 CPD ~ 499.

                    Accordingly, this protest is SUSTAINED in part and DENIED in part.

                    Our statute provides that when requested, the Board may award reasonable bid or
            proposal preparation costs if we find that the District government's actions towards tl:~
            protestor were arbitrary and capricious. D.C. Code §- 1-1189.8(e )(2). Consequently, because
            of the faulty and improper cost evaluations and discussions, Koba's treatment was indeed
            arbitrary and capricious. Therefore, it should recover its reasonable proposal preparation
            costs, including those associated with the preparation of BAFO's.

                   Thus, it is hereby

                   ORDERED, that within 15 days of receipt of this Opinion and Order, protestor
            submit to the Board a verified, detailed statement of its proposal preparation costs; and it
            is

                    FURTHER ORDERED, that within 15 days of receipt of protestor's submission, the
            District submit a response, if any.


            DATE:       June 16, 1993




           CONCUR:




                                                     3476
