                                                                                              [6076]




                    GOVERNMENT OF THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA
                           CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD



    PROTEST OF:

         INFORMATION, PROTECTION, AND ADVOCACY                       )
          CENTER FOR PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES                        )
                                                                     )       CAB No. P-427
         Under RFP No. JA/94826                                      )


      For the Protester: Harry M. Singleton, Esquire. For the Government: Warren 1. Nash
and Nancy Hapeman , Assistants Corporation Counsel.

       Opinion by Administrative Judge Jonathan D. Zischkau, with Administrative Judges
Lorilyn E. Simkins and Cynthia G. Hawkins-Leon , concurring.

                                            OPINION

        Information , Protection, and Advocacy Center for People with Disabilities ("IPACHI")
protests the award made by the Commission on Mental Health Services ("CMHS") of the
Department of Human Services C'DHS") under RFP No. JA /94826 to Woodley House/Our
Turn. IPACHI claims that Woodley Hou se did not timely subm it a proposal and that IPACHI ,
as the sole offeror, should haw received the award. Because the District has offered sufficient
ev idence that Woodley submitted a proposal prior to the RFP' s closing date and time, we deny
the protest.

                                             FACTS

        The facts are based on our analysis of IPACH I 's December 21, 1994 protest, the January
~O, 1995 agency report with exhibits, IPACHI's February 17, 1995 response to the agency
report with exhibits, and the District's March 2, 1995 reply (with exhibits) to IPACHl's
Feb ruary 17 response. I

        On May 9, 1994, CMHS issued RFP No. JA /94826 to prospective offerors. (Agency
Report CAR") Exhibit I) . Proposals were due by June 9, 1994, at 4:30 p.m. Two proposals
were received in response to the RFP on the date of closing, June 9, The proposal of IPACHI,
and its partner on the proposal, the District of Columbia Mental Health Consumers League, was
hand-delivered to Mr. Jerry Brumfield, a CMHS representative. (AR Exhibit 2). In its protest,
IPACHI claims that its proposal was time stamped at 4:29 p. m. (Protest 1 7). IPACHI also



I  For good cause shown, we have granted IPACHI's motion for an extension of time within
which to file its response to the agency report and the District's motion to file its limited reply
to IPACHI's response. Board Rules 123 . 1 and 116.1.
                                                                                            [6077]




                                              -2-                          IPACHI, CAB No. P-427



claims that its representative remained on DHS premises well after the closing time for the
submission of proposals, observed that no other proposal was submitted after IPACHl's
proposal, and that certain unnamed "DHS officials" at the time indicated that no other proposal
had been submitted in response to the RFP. (Protest ~ 9). However, according to an affidavit
submitted as an exhibit to the agency report, Ms. Janet Hill, a CMHS representative,! received
a proposal from Woodley House well before 4:30 p.m. on June 9. (AR Exhibit 3). Ms. Hill
states that she tendered a receipt to Woodley House and that Mr. Brumtield tendered a receipt
to IPACHI acknowledging that CMHS had received the offerors' proposals on June 9, 1994.
(AR Exhibit 2). Ms. Hill states in her aftidavit that the receipts were not time stamped because
CMHS' time stamp was broken. (AR Exhibit 3). IPACHI does not deny that it received such
a receipt, a copy of which is shown in Exhibit 2 of the agency report. The District has
submitted an affidavit of the executive director of Woodley House who states that she delivered
Woodley's proposal to DHS prior to 4:30 p.m. on June 9 and received a receipt as depicted in
Exhibit 2 of the agency report. (District Reply Exhibit I & Exhibit A).

         As additional support for its assertion that any Woodley proposal submission was
untimely, IPACH1 states that on October 27, 1994, its executive director was informed by the
contract specialist responsible for the R FP that Woodley House had not responded to the RFP.
(Protest ~ 10). A statement in the aftidavit of IPACHI's executive director supports the claim.
(lPACHI Response Exhibit I). The contract specialist denies having told IPACHI's executive
director that Woodley House did not submit a proposal. (AR Exhibit 4). IPACHI has also
included in its reply to the agency report an affidavit from another IPACHI employee who states
that another representative of Woodley House told her that Woodley had submitted its proposal
late, i.e .. after the June 9 , 199.+ deadline. (iPACHI's Response, Exhibit 3). The Woodley
representative denies that assertion. (District Reply, Exhibit 2).

        Notwithstanding the conflict over what was said in the October 27 conversation between
IPACHI's executive director and the contract specialist, and in the conversation between the
IPACHI employee and the other Woodley representative, we tind adequate evidence in the
record that Woodley House timely submitted its proposal. Even if IPACHI's executive director
correctly recalls the October 27 telephone conversation (though we think most likely IPACHI's
executive director misunderstood the contract representative), that cannot alter Ms. Hill's sworn
statement that she received Woodley's proposal well before closing time on June 9, coupled with
the receipt issued contemporaneously with Woodley's proposal submission. We do not believe
that the particular alleged oral communications, which lack contemporaneous written
corroboration (such as contirming letters), overcome Ms. Hill's sworn statement and the written
receipt issued to Woodley.

       IPACHI also claims in its protest that CMHS violated procurement regulations by failing
to give it prompt notice of the agency's decision to award the contract to Woodley House.
There is no dispute that the agency noti tied Woodley House of contract award on January 23,




2  Ms. Hill is a program assistant with the CMHS Contracts Branch and was responsible for
receiving proposals from prospective vendors in response to the RFP. (AR Exhibit 3).
                                                                                                [6078]



                                               - 3 -                          IPACHI. CAB No. P-427



 1995. (AR Exhibit 4; IPACHI Response at 5-6; District Reply Exhibit I & Exhibit B).3
IPACHI contends that CMHS had decided to award to Woodley House at least by December 7,
 1994. In the protest, IPACHI states that the contract specialist told IPACHI's executive director
in a December 7 telephone conversation that "Woodley Hou se/ Our Turn had in fact . secured ,
the contract and that it would be awarded to them." (Protest II). The statement is supported
by the executive director's affidavit. (IPACHI's Response, Exhibit I, ~ 8). The contract
specialist disputes that version of the conversation. According to the contract specialist, she
spoke to IPACHI's executive director on December 6 and "simply told [IPACHI's executive
director] that the contract had not yet been awarded" and that "when contract award was made,
each of the agencies [oITerors] responding to the RFP would be notified of the contract award."
(AR Exhibit 4). In the January 30, 1995 agency report , the District stated that the agency was
in the process of preparing award notifications. (AR at -l). As of February 17, IPACHI states
that it still had not received a formal noti ce from Cr-..l HS of the award to Woodley House.

                                          DISCLSSIO~


       The Board has jurisdiction over the protest pursuant to D.C. Code        ~   1- 1189.3 (1992).

       Based on our finding that Woodley Hou\e timely submitted a proposal, we cannot sustain
I PAC HI 's prote\t ground that the agency violated law and regulat ion by evaluat i ng a late
proposal.

        We also see no legitimate basis for concluding that the agency violated the procurement
regulations by failing to tender timely notice of award. The District correctly argues that
because IPACHI's proposal was I/lif determined to be un;lcceptable, the agency was not required
to provide the preaward notifications contl' lllplated by '27 DCMR ~~ 1630.1 and 1630.2.·
IPACHI is Idl with arguing that the ag<:ncy violated '27 DCMR ~ 1630.3 (requiring the
contracting officer to award a contract "with rea~onable promptness to the ~uccess ful offeror by
transmitting written notice of the award to that offeror") and '27 DCMR ~ 1630.4 (requiring th e
contracting orticcr tn nlltify un\uccessful ollerors in writing promptly after award unless


3 There is also no dispute that the executive director of Woodley House signed the proposed
contract documents on November 22, 199-l, and that the contractin g ofticer signed them on
January 20, 1995. (District Reply Exhibit I & Exhibit il).

• The two regulations provide:

  1630.1      The co ntracting officer shall noti fy each offeror whose proposal is determined to
              be unacceptable before award unless disclosure might prejudice the best interests
              of the District.

  1630.2      I f the proposal evaluation period for a solicitation is expected to exceed thirty (30)
              days, or when a limited number of offerors have been selected as being within the
              competitive ran ge, the contracting officer, upon determining that a proposal IS
              unacceptable, shall promptl y notify the offeror.
                                                                                          [6079]




                                               -4-                         IPACHI. CAB No. P-427


preaward notice was given). There is nothing in the record which suggests that the agency
violated section 16:10.:1 simply because the contracting ofticer signed the contract two months
after Woodley's executive director signed the proposed contract documents. As for section
1630.4, prompt notitication to unsuccessful offerors is an important part of the procurement
process, both frol11 the standpoint of fairness and efticiency. In most cases, an agency should
be capable of issuing the award notice to the successful offeror and the notice to unsuccessful
offerors on the same day. Under the circumstances here, the agency committed no violation,
technical or otherwise . I PACH I received actual notice of the award to Woodley by virtue of the
January :10 agency report -- just a few days after the agency notified Woodley House of the
award. In sum, the agency did not violate the requirements of 27 DCMR §§ 16:10.1-1630.4.

        Accordingly, the protest is denied.




DATE:    f\'larch   ~   I. IYY5

                                              AdlMnistrative Judge




CONCURRING:




q~0gi~
LORILY      . SIMKINS
Chief Administrative Judge




~.)d.~,brb-~
CNTHIAG:       HAWKINS-LEON
Administrative Judge
