                                                                                             [7332]

                     GOVERNMENT OF THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA
                           CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD


PROTEST OF:

        WALLACE C. WILSON                              )
                                                       )      CAB No. P-484
        Under Solicitation No. l264-1O-0B-97           )


       For the Protester: Mr. Wallace C. Wilson, pro se. For the Government: Edward Rich,
Esquire, and Warren J. Nash, Esquire, Assistants Corporation Counsel.

       Opinion by Administrative Judge Jonathan D. Zischkau, with Chief Administrative Judge
Lorilyn E. Simkins and Administrative Judge Phyllis W. Jackson, concurring.


                                             OPINION

         Mr. Wallace C. Wilson has filed a protest with regard to emergency Solicitation No. 1264-
10-QB-97 'on the gr()unds .that: ". tl1~ agency gave i!la~equate notic;e of the availability of t h e ' "
solicitation, one section of the solicitation omitted the due date for submitting proposals, and the
solicitation improperly made proposals due within only four days. We conclude that: the extent
of the agency's notice to prospective offerors to obtain the solicitation was legally adequate, the
solicitation adequately informed Wilson of the due date for proposals, and Wilson has not
demonstrated that a four-day response time was unreasonable. Accordingly, we deny the protest.

                                         BACKGROUND

        On February 24, 1997, the Department of Housing and Community Development
("DHCD") issued emergency Solicitation No. 1264-1O-0B-97 to obtain proposals for license
application review services on behalf of the District's Office of Banking and Financial Institutions
("OBFI"). OBFI prepared a list of 9 prospective offerors, Wilson being one, and transmitted the
list to the contracting officer. One DHCD contract analyst contacted 5 of the 7 prospective
offerors, including Mr. Wilson, by telephone on February 24, 1997, to advise them that there was
an emergency solicitation for services of mortgage lender/broker examiners available for pickup
at 51 N Street, N.E., Room 346, with a due date for proposals of February 28, 1997. (Affidavit
of Christopher Aninye,    '1 2-3) .. Another contract specialist contacted the other 2 prospective
offerors. Mr. Wilson recalls being contacted but his memory is that the agency representative
merely told him that there was a "package to pick up" in Room 346, without identifying that the
package was for him personally, that it was a solicitation relating to OBFI, and that the solicitation
had a four-day response time. (Protest, 1 3). He thought it was a non-essential pickup relating
to some other work of his for DHCD. In any event, he sent a courier to pick up the package but
when the courier arrived at DHCD, he did not know what package he was there to pick up. In
                                                                                            [7333]


                                                 -2- .               Wallace C. Wilson, CAB No. P-484

an affidavit, the contracting officer states that he was present when a courier came to Room 346
to pick up a package on either February 24 or 25. The contracting officer asked the courier if he
wished to make a call to detennine what package he was sent to pick up. The courier made a call
but still did not lmow what package he was sent to pick up. The courier then left Room 346.
(Affidavit of Cassandra Faye Lee, 12). Mr. Wilson had to re-send the courier the following day.
Mr. Wilson states that he finally received the package on February 27. Thereafter, he called the
contracting agency, apparently asking for more time (which was not granted) and for information
concerning the work requirements (to which he received answers). The bottom line, according
to Mr. Wilson, is that he did not have "enough time to get all the requirements completed."
(protest, 13). Mr. Wilson hand delivered his proposal the first business day after the due date
for proposals. The contracting officer did not consider his proposal because it was late. The
contracting officer received four timely proposals from prospective vendors.

        Mr. Wilson filed his protest on March 6, 1997. On March 13, the Board held a telephone
conference with the parties, including the contracting officer and the contract analyst. On March
27, the District filed its Agency Report. Mr. Wilson fIled his response on April 3 and a motion
to uphold the protest on July 22.

                                          . DISCUSSION

         The District has moved to dismiss this solicitation protest on the ground that it was fi_Ied
after the closing date for proposals. Although the District correctly notes that we have previously
held that solicitation protests must be filed prior to the bid or proposal due date, we apply that rule
as a bright-line test to avoid disputes over when the protester first knew or should have known of
the grounds for protest after receipt of the solicitation. That rule does not apply in a protest under
former section 908 of the Procurement Practices Act where the solicitation was received with so
brief a proposal response time that a protest filed after the solicitation due date is nevertheless'
within the statutory lO-day requirement under former section 908(b) which applied to protests of
both solicitations and awards. Therefore, we conclude that the protest is timely. For protests
governed by the Procurement Practices Act as amended by the Procurement Reform Amendment
Act of 1996, D.C. Law 11-259, Apr. 12, 1997, the former lO-day requirement will no longer
apply to solicitation protests. Under section 101(ee) of the Procurement Reform Amendment Act,
D.C. Code § 1-1189.8(b)(1) (Supp. 1997), a protest based upon alleged improprieties in a
solicitation which are apparent prior to bid opening or the time set for receipt of Initial proposals
now must be filed prior to bid opening or the time set for receipt of initial proposals. Under the
Procurement Reform Amendment Act, the lO-business-day filing deadline applies to all protests
other than those covered in section 1-1189.8(b)(1). See id.§ 1-1189.8(b)(2) (Supp. 1997).

         Wilson's first contention on the merits, that the solicitation is flawed because section C.II
("Proposal Submission Date and Time") does. not specify a date, is not well taken. The
solicitation identifies the due date for proposals and Mr. Wilson clearly knew proposals were due
on February 28 notwithstanding the omission in section C.ll.
                                                  "   \



                                                                                                [7334]


                                                      -3-               Wallace C. Wilson, CAB No. P-484

          We also cannot sustain the protest on the grounds that the agency gave inadequate notice
  of the emergency solicitation and that the 4-day response time was unreasonably short.. In
  procurements by competitive sealed bids or proposals, potential bidders generally bear the risk of
  nonreceipt of the solicitation documents, unless there is evidence (beyond mere nonreceipt)
  establishing that: (1) the contracting agency deliberately or consciously intended to exclude the
  prospective bidder from the competition, (2) the pOtential bidder did not neglect reasonable
  opportunities to obtain the documents and the agency failed to comply with notice requirements
  for the solicitation documentation at issue, or (3) the agency did not obtain adequate competition
  or reasonable prices. See, e.g., Nylen Business Support Products, CAB No. P-395, Mar. 24,
  1994, 41 D.C. Reg. 4143, 4144-45; Technical Resolution Corp., CAB No. P-393 , Mar. 22,
  1994, 41 D.C. Reg. 4138, 4139.                                                          '

            There is no evidence that the agency attempted to exclude Mr. Wilson from the
  . competition. Mr. Wilson was on the agency's list of 7 prospective offerors. He was given the
    same type of notice as the other offerors and had a reasonable opportunity to obtain the' solicitation
    ina timely manner .. The other prospective offerors picked up their solicitation pa<;;kages in a
.. timely manner and four offerors prepared and submitted their proposals by the February 28
    closirig date. Even accepting that there was poor communication between Mr. Wilson and the
    contract analyst,' Mr~ Wilson must bear the responsibi1ity,for not receiving the 'solicitatiQP until
    February il. If the nature of the package for pickup was unclear, he could have and should have
    sought immediate clarification on February 24 from the DHCD representative when told that a .
    package was available to be picked up. The fact that Mr. Wilson sub nutted his proposal the next
    business day after the closing date -- despite receiving the-solicitation on February 27 ---suggests
    that four days was not wholly out of line for responding to the solicitation.

         The contracting officer may accept late proposals under the conditions set forth in 27
  DCMR § 1609.3. Those conditions are not met here befause Mr. Wilson personally delivered
  his proposal late and his proposal was not the only proposal r e c e i v e d . - ' · '

            Mr. Wilson also argues, correctly, that ~ contracting officer may extend the closing date
    for offers, even after the date has passed, in order to accommodate offers that would otherwise
    be late. See Ivey Mechanical Co., B-272764, Aug. 23, 1996, 96-2 CPD 1 83- (proper for
    contracting officer to issue, after the original closing date, an amendment extending closing date
 '. to allow another untimely proposal to be accepted in the interest of obtaining competition); Fort
    Biscuit Co., 71 Compo Gen. 392 (1992), 92-1 CPD 1 440 (not improper to issue an extension
    of the closing date for the submission of best and final offerors after that date so as to permit one
    of four offerors more time to submit its best and final offer); Variconlnt'l, Inc., B-255808, Apr.
    6, 1994, 94-1 CPD 1 240 (not improper to extend the closing date after expiration of the original
    date so as to enhance Competition by permitting two offerors submitting late proposals to, compete-
    against the two offerors that submitted timely proposals). However, in the present mittter, the
    contracting officer has n<:>t issued an amendment to extend the closing date and the record does not
    support finding her failure to do so to be arbitrary and capricious.
                                                                                                               [7335]

                                                           -4-                           Wallace C. Wilson, CAB No. P-484

                     Accordingly, the protest is denied.

                     SO ORDERED.


              DATE: August 4. 1997                               ~h9_~
                                                                 J ATHAN D. ZISC U
                                                                                   .
                                                                 ciIrumstratlve Judge                          .


              CONCURRING:



r
v ' .....-
:i.

                                                                         . ....... _ .




             . Administrative Judge
. GOVERNMENT OF THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA
                             CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD
                                      717 14th STREET,N.W.,$uite 430
                                           Washington, D.C. 20005'
                                                   •   '.   I

                               'i .




                                                                       ,   \.

                                             August 6, 1997

                                                                                                 'I   •   <'



TO:'              Wallace C. Wilson
              , 14730 Soft Wi~d Drive
               . ,North Potomac, MD 20878

         I'     Warren J. Nash, Esquire
               'Howard Schwartz, Esquire
                Assistants Corporation CQunseI
                4414th Street,N.W., lOthFI.
                Washington, DC' 20001 .


SUBJECT:        CAB No: P-,484, WALLACEC. WILSON·               f .

                                                                                •   ,I


       A~tached   is a copy. of the Board's Opinion denying the 'protest




                                                                                         \   .
