                   GOVERNMENT OF THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA
                         CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD

PROTEST OF:

       C.P.F. CORPORATION                                         )
                                                                  )      CAB No. P-413
       Under Invitation No. 4110-AA-03-1-DW                       )


      For the Protester: Gerald T. Nielsen, Morgan, Lewis & Bockius. For the
Government: Nancy K. Hapeman and Edward J. Rich, Assistants Corporation Counsel.

       Opinion by Administrative Judge Jonathan D. Zischkau, with Administrative Judges
Lorilyn E. Simkins and Cynthia G. Hawkins-León, concurring.


                                          OPINION

        C.P.F. Corporation ("CPF") protests the award of a contract for janitorial services to
Jones Construction and Maintenance Company ("Jones"). CPF asserts that Jones' bid was
unreasonably low, that the contracting officer lacked a reasonable basis for determining
Jones to be a responsible bidder, and that Jones' was ineligible to receive award and its bid
was nonresponsive because Jones was not certified under the proper procurement
category for this set aside solicitation. The District argues that a contracting officer's
business judgments are accorded wide latitude and the contracting officer's actions here
were within the bounds of reasonableness. Soon after Jones began contract performance,
the agency terminated the contract for default based on asserted performance deficiencies.
 The agency has resolicited for the same services identified in the original solicitation, under
the assumption that the procurement regulations required resolicitation. As second low
bidder in the original solicitation, CPF claims that it should receive award under the original
solicitation and that a resolicitation would contravene the integrity of the sealed bidding
procedures. We sustain the protest.

                                      BACKGROUND

       The Department of Administrative Services ("DAS") issued Invitation No. 4110-AA-
03-1-DW (the "IFB") on April 29, 1994, for janitorial services for the Frank D. Reeves
Municipal Center ("Reeves Center"). (Motion of the District of Columbia To Dismiss the
Protest ("Motion to Dismiss"), Exhibit 1). The procurement of the janitorial services was the
responsibility of DAS' Procurement and General Services Administration ("PGA") and was
being conducted by a contracting officer in PGA's Products and Building Services Division,
aided by a contract specialist, among others. (Agency Report, Exhibit 2). DAS' Building
Management Administration ("BMA") is responsible for the operation of janitorial services at
                                            −2−                     C.P.F. Corp., CAB No. P-413


the Reeves Center. (Agency Report, Exhibit 3). It appears that the General Specifications
and Cleaning Specifications were prepared within BMA's Building Operations Division.
(Motion to Dismiss, Exhibit 1). The solicitation was set aside for certified small business
enterprise ("SBE") bidders in the procurement category of "General Services." (Id.).

        On bid opening date, June 7, 1994, 13 bids were opened. Jones was the apparent
low bidder with a total bid price for the base year and two option years of $350,172 and an
evaluated price of $325,659.96 after applying preference points. The protester, CPF, was
the second-low bidder on the IFB with a total bid price of $619,920 and an evaluated price
of $588,924. The third-low bidder was Rosa's Contracting with a total bid price of $698,184
and an evaluated price of $663,274.80. The fourth-low bidder was All-Kleen Inc. with a
total bid price of $839,340 and an evaluated price of $780,586.20.1 For the remaining 9
bidders, total prices ranged from $864,468 to $1,835,999.64. (Motion to Dismiss, Exhibit
2).

        Soon after bid opening, the PGA contract specialist for the solicitation contacted
Jones, requesting that Jones verify its bid. By letter of June 10, 1994, the president of
Jones replied: "We have carefully reviewed our bid for Janitorial Services at the Reeves
Center and are prepared to execute the contract at our bid price." (Agency Report, Exhibit
1). The contracting officer did not obtain any information from Jones with regard to its
estimated manhours. Although no government estimate had been prepared for the
solicitation, we are told that the contracting officer and the contract specialist "were aware
of the estimated cost of performance ($342,000) of the contract with CPF [the incumbent
contractor] to provide janitorial services at the Reeves Center that ran from October 1,
1993, to September 30, 1994." (Agency Report at 9 n.2).


1
   In examining the reasonableness of prices, it is useful to note the yearly and monthly
breakdown for each bid shown by the agency's bid tabulation form: $116,724 yearly and
$9,727 monthly for Jones, $206,640 yearly and $17,220 monthly for CPF, $232,728 yearly
and $19,394 monthly for Rosa's Contracting, and $279,780 yearly and $23,315 monthly for
All-Kleen. (Motion to Dismiss, Exhibit 2).
                                            −3−                    C.P.F. Corp., CAB No. P-413


       By intra-agency memorandum of June 13,2 the contracting officer (acting chief of
PGA's Products and Building Services Division) transmitted the bid tabulations to BMA's
Building Operations Division. In a June 21 memorandum, the chief of BMA's Building
Operations Division advised the contracting officer in pertinent part:

        Note is taken of the fact that the cost to provide the twenty-four (24)
        mandatory man-hours, Monday through Friday, will consume nearly fifty (50)
        percent of Jones Construction's monthly bid of $9,727.00. Furthermore,
        when you consider the additional hours the contractor will have to utilize in
        cleaning the facility between 5:00 p.m. and 9:30 p.m., we seriously question
        the low bidder's ability to satisfactorily deliver the services.

        However, should you decide to award to Jones Construction and
        Maintenance Company, we strongly recommend a thorough check to ensure
        technical and financial responsibility.

(Agency Report, Exhibit 2). Attached to the June 21 memorandum is a worksheet which
calculates the cost of the 24-hour mandatory daily manhours at $4,783.58 per month and
$57,402.96 per year. In a June 21 handwritten transmittal, the contracting officer sought
advice from her superior, the Administrator of PGA, as follows:

        Wanda, Jones Construction's monthly bid price of $9,727 is enough to cover
        the payroll ($4,783.58 + 2,000 for cleaning the facility between 5:00 p.m. and
        9:30 p.m.). Approx[imately] $3,000 would be left for the purchase of
        supplies, insurance & profit. I think we should give him a chance provided a
        responsibility determination is made. Ch[arlene]
        CPF is the next low bidder. Please advise.

(Agency Report, Exhibit 2). It appears that the contracting officer relied on BMA's cost
estimate for the 24 daily mandatory hours. On the other hand, there is no evidence in the
record as furnished by the District to support the contracting officer's $2,000 estimate for
the nighttime cleaning -- i.e., the cleaning between 5:00 p.m. and 9:30 p.m. -- which is in
addition to the 24 daily mandatory manhours. Unknown to the contracting officer at the

2
    The District has not included the June 13 memorandum in the record.
                                           −4−                     C.P.F. Corp., CAB No. P-413


time of this transmittal, her estimate of $2,000 for the nighttime cleaning was significantly
understated. In a handwritten response to the contracting officer annotated on the same
transmittal, and, apparently, on the same day, the PGA Administrator stated:

       Charlene: Agreed. BMA's concerns are not sufficient to not award to Jones.
       Please proceed with the award action process.

(Id.). In another transmittal one day later, June 22, the contracting officer wrote:

       Diane, Ed David stated that most of the cleaning will be performed at night.
       He stated that approx[imately] 156 daily M[an] H[ou]rs were needed for night
       cleaning. I told Wanda what he said which was not spelled out in their
       [BMA's] memo. Anyway, Wanda said they [BMA] have not presented
       anything materially to prevent award to Jones. Do a resp[onsibility]
       determination, call their references, & check on their tax info before
       awarding.

(Id.). This additional information from Mr. David, an employee in DAS' BMA, that
approximately 156 manhours were required each day for night cleaning -- in addition to the
24 daily mandatory manhours -- should have alerted the contracting officer to her initial
significantly understated cost estimate for nighttime cleaning. The 156 manhour estimate
for the nighttime cleaning hours,3 along with the procurement history for janitorial services
at the Reeves Center,4 not to mention the fact that the next higher group of bids were
significantly higher than Jones', should have put the contracting officer on notice that
something was seriously wrong with her $2,000 estimate for nighttime work in particular
and Jones' bid in general. Even assuming only 100 hours were required for each nighttime

3
  The District does not challenge the accuracy of the 156-hour estimate and it does not
appear to be unreasonable. It would appear from the information in the record that the
night cleaning itself would consume at least 120 manhours. We are told that GSA's
standard rate for cleaning office facilities is 2,500 square feet per hour per person, the
Reeves Center contains approximately 379,250 square feet of occupiable space to be
cleaned under the solicitation's requirements (Motion to Dismiss, Exhibit 1), and the
daytime activities include cleaning approximately 75,000 square feet. That would mean
that approximately 300,000 square feet remain to be cleaned during each nighttime shift,
which, at the cleaning rate of 2,500 square feet per hour, yields approximately 120
manhours of work.
4
  Besides the $342,000 one-year price, the prior contract specified a 184-hour daily
mandatory minimum for all cleaning and utility work at the Reeves Center. (Protester's
Reply to the Agency Report, Exhibit B).
                                             −5−                       C.P.F. Corp., CAB No. P-413


cleaning, the monthly or yearly minimum cost for just that portion of the work (using the
mandatory wage and fringe benefits rates and labor burden rates) is at least double Jones'
monthly or yearly bid price for all work required by the solicitation.

        In a letter of June 22, Jones responded to a June 13 letter5 from the contracting
officer that requested data for determining responsibility. (Agency Report, Exhibit 3). The
response from Jones indicates that the company has been performing maintenance
services for approximately three years. The response also contained an income statement
for the year ending December 31, 1993, showing total revenue of $811,326, total operating
expenses of $833,140, negative net income of $55,589 for 1993 and a negative retained
earnings of $42,829 at the beginning of 1993. (Id.). Another document showed negative
cash flow. (Id.).

       On July 8, the contracting officer executed a Determination and Findings For
Contractor's Responsibility. (Agency Report, Exhibit 3). Item 3 of the D&F, entitled
"Estimated Fair and Reasonable Cost," contains simply the $116,724 bid price found in
Jones' bid. There is no objective evidence in the D&F or in the rest of the record which
provides a reasonable basis for such a determination. The information contained in Exhibit
2 of the agency report constitutes not only insufficient evidence to support finding Jones'
bid price to be reasonable, the information supports finding Jones' price to be
unreasonable. The record demonstrates that the contracting officer's estimate of $2,000 for
nighttime work was clearly unreasonable and unsupported. The same can be said for the
$3,000 which the contracting officer apparently felt "would be left for the purchase of
supplies, insurance & profit." In reviewing the record as a whole, we are compelled to find
that the contracting officer never conducted a meaningful analysis of either manhour
estimates or costs by which to judge the reasonableness of Jones' bid price, and therefore
could not make a credible determination that Jones' bid price was reasonable. On the
contrary, the record before us demonstrates that Jones' bid was unreasonably and
unrealistically low. In view of the significant below cost bid offered by Jones, and the
financial condition of Jones as revealed by the record, we find that there was insufficient
information to support the contracting officer's determination of responsibility.

        On the same date that the D&F was executed, July 8, the contracting officer made

5
    The District has not included this June 13 letter in the record.
                                           −6−                     C.P.F. Corp., CAB No. P-413


award to Jones for the base year period of August 11, 1994 through August 10, 1995. CPF
received notice of the award on July 14, and filed its protest on July 22, claiming that the
award to Jones should be cancelled because Jones' bid was so low that the contracting
officer could not have reasonably determined Jones to be a responsible bidder. CPF
requested inter alia that the Board order the District to cancel Jones' contract and have the
award directed to CPF as the low responsive and responsible bidder.

        It was not long before the problem of Jones' unreasonably low bid manifested itself.
Jones began performance in August 1994. On September 2, 1994, DAS sent a "cure
letter/show cause notice" to Jones concerning deficiencies in its performance, threatening
default termination if the deficiencies were not corrected. (Agency Report at 6). After
obtaining an extension of time within which to respond to the protest, the District, on
September 12, filed with the Board a motion to dismiss, stating that the protest should be
dismissed as moot because the District was in the process of terminating Jones' contract
for default. On September 19, the District issued a letter terminating Jones' contract for
default based on an asserted failure to correct performance deficiencies. (Id. at 3).

        On September 15, 1994, the District issued Invitation For Bid No. 4262-AA-03-1-DW
for a 120-day emergency contract for janitorial services for the Reeves Center. On
September 20, the District awarded the 120-day emergency contract to Rosa's Contracting
(the third low bidder under the original solicitation), at a monthly price of $16,500 (Agency
Report, Exhibit 4), which is about $3,000 per month less than it had bid under the original
solicitation and about $700 less than CPF had bid under the original solicitation.

        On September 26, 1994, CPF filed its opposition to the District's motion to dismiss
on the ground that terminating Jones' contract did not afford the complete relief requested
by CPF in its protest. CPF asserted that the District was intending to resolicit rather than
award a contract to it under the original solicitation. CPF claimed that recompeting not only
places an additional administrative burden on the agency but also would result in an illegal
auction by forcing CPF to recompete after its price had been revealed in the original
competition. On September 28, 1994, the agency issued a new solicitation for janitorial
services for the Reeves Center. There are no substantive differences between the new
solicitation and the original solicitation. (Agency Report at 12; Agency Report, Exhibit 7).
At the Board's request, the agency has twice extended bid opening, first to November 14,
1994, and most recently to November 22, 1994.6

       The Board denied the District's motion to dismiss the protest during a conference
with the parties on October 20, 1994, and directed that the District file an agency report by
October 28 addressing the responsibility issue raised by the protest. (October 21, 1994

6
    The Board appreciates the contracting officer's cooperation.
                                           −7−                     C.P.F. Corp., CAB No. P-413


Order and Report on Telephone Conference). During the October 20 conference, the
Board also inquired as to why the agency had decided to recompete for the same
requirements found in the original solicitation. The District replied that the contracting
officer believed that the District's procurement regulations regarding default termination
required a new solicitation. The Board requested that the District address the issue in its
agency report and to advise the Board as to whether there are any other grounds for
resoliciting rather than awarding under the original solicitation (e.g., some requirements
have changed, original bids are stale or not considered reasonable). The Board directed
the protester to respond to the agency report by November 4, 1994. The parties timely filed
their papers. In addition to filing its response to the agency report, the protester also has
moved to amend its protest to add as an additional ground that Jones was ineligible to
receive award of the contract because it was not certified under the District's Equal
Opportunity for Local, Small and Disadvantaged Business Enterprises Act in the category
of "General Services" as called for by the solicitation. The protester states that it first
learned of this ground for protest when it received the agency report. The motion is timely,
has not been opposed, and is granted.7

       In its agency report, the District contends that the contracting officer properly
determined that Jones was a responsible bidder and that broad discretion is given a
contracting officer in determining the responsibility of a potential contractor. The District
states that "the contracting officer and the contract specialist examined the bid of Jones
and determined, through bid verification and other means, that Jones was capable of
performing the contract at the price bid." (Agency Report at 8-9). With regard to the
reasons for conducting a resolicitation, the District argues that the contracting officer
believed in good faith that she did not have the discretion to make an award under the
original solicitation and that 27 DCMR § 3716.4 required a resolicitation.


7
  In view of our conclusion infra that the contracting officer's responsibility determination
with regard to Jones cannot be sustained, we will not address this additional protest ground
advanced by CPF.
                                             −8−                     C.P.F. Corp., CAB No. P-413


                                        DISCUSSION

       The Board has jurisdiction over this protest pursuant to D.C. Code § 1-1189.3.

A.     The Responsibility Determination

      Bidder responsibility is a prerequisite to award pursuant to an IFB. D.C. Code § 1-
1183.3(e). A responsible bidder is "a person who has the capability in all respects to
perform fully the contract requirements, and the integrity and reliability which will assure
good faith performance." Id. § 1-1181.7(40).

        The procurement regulations require that the contracting officer shall determine
whether a prospective contractor is responsible and whether the prices offered are
reasonable. 27 DCMR § 1540.1. The regulations also require that the contracting officer
make award only to responsible contractors, that the contracting officer make a
responsibility determination in writing prior to award, and that in the absence of information
clearly indicating that the prospective contractor is responsible, the contracting officer shall
make a determination of nonresponsibility. 27 DCMR §§ 2200.1-2200.3. The same
regulations also set forth responsibility criteria. Id. § 2200.4. If the contracting officer
determines that the price bid by a prospective contractor is so low as to appear
unreasonable or unrealistic, the contracting officer may determine the prospective
contractor to be nonresponsible. Id. § 2200.5. In order to make a responsibility
determination, the contracting officer must possess or obtain information sufficient to
demonstrate that the prospective contractor currently meets the applicable responsibility
standards and requirements. Id. § 2204.1. If the available information is insufficient to
make a determination of responsibility, the contracting officer shall determine the contractor
to be nonresponsible. Id. § 2204.4.

        The parties correctly identify our standard for reviewing a contracting officer's
responsibility determination. Under the Procurement Practices Act, our review of agency
actions is de novo and thus there is no presumption of agency correctness. D.C. Code § 1-
1189.3; Ideal Electrical Supply Corp., CAB No. P-372, Aug. 13, 1993, 41 D.C. Reg. 3603,
3606 (and cases cited therein). Nevertheless, because a responsibility determination
requires the contracting officer to exercise business judgment, 27 DCMR §§ 2200, 2204,
we accord the contracting officer broad discretion in this determination, consistent with well-
settled procurement law principles and procurement regulation that the contracting officer
"shall have wide latitude to exercise business judgment." 27 DCMR § 1003.4; Ideal
Electrical Supply Corp., 41 D.C. Reg. at 3606; Dixon's Pest Control Services, Inc., CAB No.
P-401, Apr. 6, 1994, 42 D.C. Reg. 4528, 4529. Consequently, we will not overturn a
determination of responsibility unless a protester can show fraud or bad faith, a bidder's
failure to adhere to definitive responsibility criteria, or that such a determination lacked a
reasonable basis. Dixon's Pest Control Services, Inc., 42 D.C. Reg. at 4529; Ideal
                                             −9−                      C.P.F. Corp., CAB No. P-413


Electrical Supply Corp., 41 D.C. Reg. at 3605-06. An affirmative determination of
responsibility is based on information available at the time the contracting officer makes the
decision. J&L Contract Services, Inc., CAB No. P-313, Oct. 2, 1992, 40 D.C. Reg. 4565,
4567; Group Insurance Administration, Inc., CAB No. P-309-B, Sept. 4, 1992, 40 D.C. Reg.
4485, 4517, aff'd, No. 92-12406 (Super. Ct. Apr. 25, 1994).

        We have sustained agencies' nonresponsibility determinations where a bid was
unreasonably or unrealistically low. J&L Contract Services, Inc., CAB No. P-313, Oct. 2,
1992, 40 D.C. Reg. 4565 (sustaining contracting officer's determination that bidder was
nonresponsible because bid was so low that bidder could not meet the minimum wage and
fringe benefit costs necessary to provide the required services); Top Service Construction,
Inc., CAB No. P-409, July 12, 1994, 42 P.D. 4628 (sustaining determination of
nonresponsibility where the bid was significantly below government estimates and omitted
and understated other costs of performance). On the facts presented by the record here,
we conclude that the contracting officer had no reasonable basis for an affirmative
determination of responsibility. All of the objective data available to the contracting officer -
- the manhour and cost information from the agency's administration most familiar with
janitorial service operations, the procurement history, and the significant discrepancy
between Jones' low bid and the group of next higher bids -- pointed to the conclusion that
Jones' bid was unrealistically low. The District correctly argues that simply because Jones'
bid price was below its cost of performance, that does not automatically mean that Jones is
nonresponsible. Citing Oshkosh Truck Corp., B-252708.2, Aug. 24, 1993, 93-2 CPD ¶ 115,
Cobarc Services, Inc. -- Reconsideration, B-252359.3, Aug. 3, 1993, 93-2 CPD ¶ 74, and
Crestmont Cleaning Service & Supply Co., B-254486, Dec. 22, 1993, 93-2 CPD ¶ 336, the
District argues that even if a bid is below cost, it is not legally objectionable, and that
whether the contract can be performed at the price bid is a matter of responsibility.
Although we agree with that general principle, on the facts here we conclude that the
contracting officer did not have legally sufficient information upon which to make an
affirmative determination of responsibility.

        At a minimum, the information available should have suggested to the contracting
officer to conduct a more careful review of Jones' bid, including, for example, a request for
information concerning Jones' estimates of manhours and costs. See 27 DCMR § 2204;
Contract Services Co., 66 Comp. Gen. 468 (1987), 87-1 CPD ¶ 521 (where contracting
officer still believed low bid to be mistaken in spite of verification, bidder should have been
requested to provide sufficient explanation and/or documentation to assure contracting
officer that bid as confirmed was correct). The intra-agency memoranda and transmittals
suggest that the contracting officer did not fully appreciate that the responsibility
determination is an affirmative determination and that a lack of sufficient information to
establish responsibility dictates a finding of nonresponsibility. 27 DCMR § 2200.3.
Although we do not think that the contracting officer's comment of "giving him [Jones] a
chance" was the sole or dominant reason for the responsibility determination, such a factor
                                            − 10 −                   C.P.F. Corp., CAB No. P-413


is simply not part of the responsibility equation. Considering the magnitude of Jones'
below-cost bid, and the financial documentation of record, notwithstanding Jones's three-
year history of satisfactory performance, we cannot find reasonable support for determining
Jones to be financially responsible or capable of meeting the performance requirements for
purposes of this solicitation.

B.     The Remedy

        Because Jones was not a responsible bidder, contract award to it was improper. We
need take no action with respect to the contract since the District already has terminated
Jones' contract. The issue before us is whether resolicitation should continue, as the
District urges, or whether the agency should make award under the original solicitation, as
urged by CPF.

        Our reading of the District's position is that the contracting officer believed that she
had no authority to make an award under the original solicitation after the default
termination of Jones' contract, based on her reading of 27 DCMR §§ 3716.4, which states
that: "Except as provided in §§ 3716.5 and 3717 [surety takeover agreements], the
contracting officer shall use the procedures set forth in chapters 15 [procurement by
competitive sealed bidding] and 16 [procurement by competitive sealed proposals] of this
title, whichever is applicable, to repurchase the terminated supplies or services, or any
additional requirements needed." 27 DCMR § 3716.5 provides in relevant part: "[I]f
supplies or services are required immediately, the contracting officer may reprocure the
required supplies or the services on an emergency basis in accordance with the provisions
of chapter 17 [sole source and emergency procurements] of this title. . . ." In its agency
report, the District argues that 27 DCMR § 3716.4 does not permit reinstating an original
solicitation after a contract has been awarded and where the contract subsequently has
been terminated for default. In support, it cites Interstate Forestry, Inc., AGBCA No. 89-
114.1, 91-1 BCA ¶ 23,660, for the proposition that "an award of a contract under a
solicitation effectively cancels the original bids, making a resolicitation rather than award to
the second lowest bidder appropriate in a termination for default situation." (Agency Report
at 12 n.4).8 On the other hand, the District states elsewhere in its agency report that it
would not "foreclose reinstatement of the solicitation in certain specific circumstances after
a termination for default." (Agency Report at 13 & n.5). The District does not articulate
what those specific circumstances might be. We can also discern from the agency report
an argument that the contracting officer has broad discretion to decide how to reprocure the
services, and her decision here should not be disturbed.


8
  We have reviewed Interstate Forestry but have been unable to find any support for the
proposition for which it is cited by the District.
                                            − 11 −                   C.P.F. Corp., CAB No. P-413


        First, we do not read 27 DCMR § 3716.4 as precluding reinstatement of the original
solicitation. Section 3716.4 simply requires the contracting officer to reprocure through
competitive means. Reinstating the original solicitation to select the lowest responsive and
responsible bidder is, in fact, a selection meeting the sealed bidding requirements of
chapter 15. Neither party has argued and the record offers no basis for finding that the
original solicitation failed to attract competitive bids.

        Second, and more importantly, we must consider the posture of this case when
considering the appropriate remedy. The protest was filed after award to Jones. The
protester challenged the award and requested that it receive award as the lowest
responsive and responsible bidder. The agency terminated Jones' contract after the
District filed its motion to dismiss, and after that, the agency decided to issue a new and
duplicative solicitation. Under these circumstances there can be no question that we have
jurisdiction to afford appropriate relief with regard to the original solicitation. D.C. Code §§
1-1189.3, 1-1189.8. Contrary to the District's position that contract award effectively
cancels the original bids, our Board and the Comptroller General have ruled that improper
awards may in appropriate circumstances be set aside, bids reinstated, and award made to
the lowest responsive and responsible bidder. See, e.g., Ideal Electrical Supply Corp., 41
D.C. Reg. at 3608-09; Singleton Electric Co., CAB No. P-411, Nov. 15, 1994, 42 P.D. 4888,
4901; Architectural Window Systems, Inc., B-213799, Mar. 19, 1984, 84-1 CPD ¶ 326. In
Ideal, we terminated a contract for the convenience of the District and directed the agency
to award to the next low responsive and responsible bidder. In Singleton, we determined
that a cancellation action was improper, and directed that original bids be reinstated and
award be made to the lowest responsive and responsible bidder. In Architectural Window
Systems, the Comptroller General sustained an award to the original low bidder on the
basis of a revived bid -- following termination of a contract previously awarded to the
protester.

        In the current protest, the same considerations for protecting the integrity of the
sealed bidding process dictate that original bids be reinstated and award made to the
lowest responsive and responsible bidder. Architectural Window Systems, 84-1 CPD ¶
326. All the bids in the original solicitation have been revealed. The agency's requirements
have not changed. The District has not suggested that the bid prices from the original
solicitation are stale or unreasonably high. In fact, the District has not offered any
substantive reason for resoliciting. We cannot see how impartiality and fair play for
competitive sealed bidding would be furthered by allowing bidders another opportunity to
better the prices of their competition. See B-154483, Oct. 30, 1964. Finally, making award
under the original solicitation will avoid additional administrative costs associated with
conducting an unnecessary resolicitation.

        Accordingly, we sustain the protest, and we direct the District to cancel the new
solicitation, reinstate the bids under the original solicitation, and make award to the lowest
                                     − 12 −           C.P.F. Corp., CAB No. P-413


responsive and responsible bidder.

      SO ORDERED.


DATE: November 18, 1994                        /s/ Jonathan D. Zischkau
                                              JONATHAN D. ZISCHKAU
                                              Administrative Judge


CONCURRING:


 /s/ Lorilyn E. Simkins
LORILYN E. SIMKINS
Chief Administrative Judge


/s/ Cynthia G. Hawkins-León
CYNTHIA G. HAWKINS-LEÓN
Administrative Judge
