                    GOVERNMENT OF THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA
                          CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD

44 D.C. Reg. 6378

PROTEST OF:

       UNFOLDMENT, INC.                              )
                                                     )      CAB No. P-435
       Under RFP No. 5090-AA-NS-3-CW                 )

      For the Protester: Kemi Morten, Esq., and Brian J.H. Lederer, Esq. For the Government:
Edward Rich and Anne Cauman, Assistants Corporation Counsel.

       Opinion by Administrative Judge Jonathan D. Zischkau, with Administrative Judges
Lorilyn E. Simkins and Phyllis W. Jackson, concurring.

                             ORDER ON MOTION TO DISMISS

        Unfoldment, Inc., has filed a protest regarding Department of Administrative Services
("DAS") emergency solicitation No. 5090-AA-NS-3-CW. Unfoldment argues that the
solicitation fails to meet competition requirements, constitutes an improper sole source
procurement aimed at the incumbent contractor, A.L. Nellum and Associates, Inc. ("Nellum"),
and fails to satisfy program requirements dictated by prior judicial orders. The protest also
alleges bias in the selection and award process which resulted in an award to Nellum. The
District has moved the Board to dismiss the protest on the grounds that the protest is untimely as
to some issues and fails to set forth a clear statement of the law and facts as to other issues. We
dismiss in part and deny in part the protest.

                                             FACTS

        On April 14, 1995, DAS issued emergency solicitation No. 5090-AA-NS-3-CW in the
open market requesting proposals for drug abuse services for residential treatment and an
aftercare program for the Department of Corrections. (District's Motion to Dismiss, Exhibit 1).
The emergency solicitation, authorized by an April 3, 1995 determination and findings by the
Director of DAS, was sent to three prospective offerors. (Id., Exhibit 2).

       On April 19, 1995, DAS issued Amendment No. 1 to the solicitation extending the
submission date for proposals. On April 24, 1995, DAS issued Amendment No. 2 which added a
clause and contained responses to 23 questions submitted by Unfoldment. On April 27, 1995,
DAS received offers from Unfoldment and Nellum. (Id., Exhibit 2). Nellum's proposal received
a score of 355 while Unfoldment's received a score of 185. In addition, the contracting officer
determined that Unfoldment's offer was technically unacceptable. (Id.) On May 30, 1995, DAS
awarded Contract No. 5090-AA-NS-3-CW to Nellum based on its high score (and presumably
because Unfoldment's proposal was determined to be technically unacceptable). Unfoldment
received a notice from DAS on June 5, 1995 that Nellum had received the award.
                                                 2                     Unfoldment, Inc., CAB No. P-435


        Unfoldment filed a "Notice of Appeal" with the Board on June 14, 1995, which we
deemed to be a protest. In its protest, Unfoldment challenges "the solicitation process, the
selection process and the contract award" and alleges:

       bias in the solicitation, selection and award of the contract; utilization of improper
       solicitation set-asides that favor minority for profit businesses and discriminate
       against minority nonprofit organization; use of inappropriate and unconstitutional
       evaluation procedures and possible violations of the D.C. Procurement Practices
       Act and procedures.

Perhaps confusing the rules governing disputes with the rules governing protests, Unfoldment
indicated that it would later file a "complaint." The Board conducted a telephone conference
with the parties on June 30 to clarify the Board's rules and the protest issues. During the
conference, the Board learned that Unfoldment had not received a debriefing despite its request
for one. In a June 20 order, the Board directed that Unfoldment receive a debriefing and
supplement its protest. On July 17, the Board ordered the District to furnish relevant documents
requested by Unfoldment. Thereafter, the District provided Unfoldment with responsive
documents.

        On July 28, 1995, Unfoldment filed a "Supplemental Protest" identifying six protest
grounds: (1) DAS' decision to use a solicitation for competitive sealed proposals in lieu of
competitive sealed bids is not supported by the written justification required by statute; (2) DAS'
market survey violated the competition requirements of D.C. Code § 1-1183.12; (3) the
procurement constituted an improper sole source procurement directed to Nellum; (4) the
solicitation was improperly designed and prepared; (5) DAS' determination and findings
supporting the need for an emergency solicitation violate D.C. Code § 1-1183.12 and 27 DCMR
§§ 1710.2 and 1710.3; and (6) DAS violated 27 DCMR § 1710.6 by failing to initiate a separate
non-emergency procurement action at the same time that the emergency procurement was made.

        On August 18, 1995, the District moved to dismiss the protest, as supplemented, on the
grounds that (1) in violation of Board Rule 302.1(c), Unfoldment has failed to set forth a clear
and concise statement of the legal and factual bases for its protest, and (2) those portions of the
protest challenging the solicitation itself are untimely. Unfoldment opposes the District's
motion, repeating allegations set forth in its prior submissions and arguing that it has not
received an adequate document production from the District.1


1
   We grant Unfoldment's motion for leave to file out of time its opposition. Unfoldment's
request for additional documents is denied. First, the Board held a telephone conference with the
parties shortly after the District produced its documents on July 24 and neither then nor at any
time up to Unfoldment's July 28 deadline for supplementing its protest did it move to compel.
Unfoldment was obliged to obtain whatever documents it needed in sufficient time to meet the
July 28 deadline. Therefore, its current request, and the "reservation" of a right to further
supplement its protest upon receiving additional documentation (which was contained in its July
28 submission) are unavailing and disregard the Board's scheduling order. Second, the types of
documents that Unfoldment claims it has not received are ones either that the District states do
                                                  3                     Unfoldment, Inc., CAB No. P-435


                                          DISCUSSION

       The Board's protest jurisdiction is governed by D.C. Code §§ 1-1189.3(1) and 1-
1189.8(a)-(c).

        Generally, to satisfy the 10-working-day statutory limitation for a challenge to the terms
of the solicitation, D.C. Code § 1-1189.8(b), the protest must be filed with the Board on or before
the closing date for proposals. See, e.g., Technical Resolution Corp., CAB No. P-393, Mar. 22,
1994, 41 D.C. Reg. 4138, 4141-42; Associated Tool Co., 71 Comp. Gen. 359, 361, 92-1 CPD ¶
376. Plainly, all of Unfoldment's challenges directed at the solicitation itself, raised well after
the closing date for proposals, are untimely. Therefore, the following protest grounds are
dismissed: bias in the solicitation; improper solicitation set-aside favoring minority for-profit
businesses; inappropriate and unconstitutional evaluation procedures; improper use of
competitive sealed proposals rather than competitive sealed bids without written justification;
improper market survey; improper design and preparation of the solicitation; determination and
findings fail to support an emergency solicitation; and failure to initiate a separate non-
emergency procurement action at the same time that the emergency procurement was made. See,
e.g., Precision Signal, Inc., B-250852.2, Apr. 12, 1993, 93-1 CPD ¶ 309 (objection to
solicitation's evaluation factors untimely when raised after closing time for proposals); ASOMA
Instruments, Inc., B-251674, Apr. 13, 1993, 93-1 CPD ¶ 317 (complaint that RFP should have
been issued as a small business set-aside had to be raised prior to closing date for proposals);
Professional Performance Development Group, Inc., B-252322, June 9, 1993, 93-1 CPD ¶ 447
(allegations that RFP omitted certain provisions required by FAR, that certain provisions
restricted competition, and that changes caused by a solicitation amendment indicate bias, had to
be raised prior to closing date); White Water Assocs., Inc., B-253825, Aug. 26, 1993, 93-2 CPD ¶
126 (decision to replace set-aside solicitation with unrestricted solicitation had to be challenged
prior to closing date).

        The remaining protest grounds, i.e., the agency was biased in the selection and contract
award, the selection process was treated as a sole source procurement, and the agency engaged in
illegal "evaluation procedures", refer to the actual conduct of the evaluation, selection, and
award, rather than the content of the solicitation. Therefore, these allegations do not fall as
untimely allegations of solicitation improprieties.

        The District argues that we should not even reach the merits on these protest grounds
because Unfoldment's protest fails to set forth a clear and concise statement of the legal and
factual grounds as specified in Board Rule 302.1(c).2 Although the District treats Board Rule




not exist or that in any event relate to protest grounds that were filed untimely.
2
  Board Rule 302.1, 36 D.C. Reg. 2711 (1989), provides in relevant part that all protests shall be
in writing, addressed to the Board, and shall include: "A clear and concise statement of the legal
and factual grounds of the protest, including copies of relevant documents, and citations to
statutes, regulations or contract provisions claimed to be violated. . . ."
                                                     4                 Unfoldment, Inc., CAB No. P-435


302.1(c) in a way that one might employ Rule 12(b)(6)3 of the Superior Court Rules of Civil
Procedure in a motion for judgment on the pleadings, Board Rule 302.1(c) does not serve the
same purpose that Rule 12(b)(6) does in an action before the Superior Court. Rule 302.1 is
meant to advise protesters of the expected form and content of a protest, so that the protester
identifies the legal and factual grounds of the protest for the Board and the agency and its
counsel. It does not speak to raising a defense to a claim for relief in a pleading, although we
have on some occasions cited Board Rule 302.1(c) when dismissing a case for failure to state a
claim.

        The issue of whether a protest fails to state a claim must be considered first with regard to
our statutory mandate to "promptly decide whether the solicitation or award was in accordance
with the applicable law, regulations, and terms and conditions of the solicitation." D.C. Code §
1-1189.8. That leads us to determine (1) which laws, regulations, and solicitation terms are
applicable to the protest issues, and (2) whether there is a preponderance of record evidence to
support a protester's claim that the agency has violated applicable law, regulations, or solicitation
terms.

        We must also consider the nature of a protest and our administrative protest procedures.
Our protest procedures contemplate that the Board generally will base its decision on a record
consisting of the protest submission, an agency report, a response to the agency report,
documentation made a part of the record by the parties, and, where appropriate, testimony given
at a hearing or through deposition. Our expectation of specificity in the initial protest submission
must take into account that the protester may often have little more than the benefit of the
solicitation documentation, its observations as a participant in the procurement, and a debriefing.
Sometimes, as was the case here, the protester may not even have received a debriefing.
Therefore, the absence of detailed facts concerning an alleged procurement deficiency in the
initial protest filing does not necessarily or usually dictate a dismissal. Many protests are

3
    Rule 12(b) (1995 ed.) states in relevant part:



         Every defense, in law or fact, to a claim for relief in any pleading, whether a
         claim, counterclaim, cross-claim, or 3rd-party claim, shall be asserted in the
         responsive pleading thereto if one is required, except that the following defenses
         may at the option of the pleader be made by motion: . . . (6) failure to state a
         claim upon which relief can be granted . . . . If, on a motion asserting the defense
         numbered (6) to dismiss for failure of the pleading to state a claim upon which
         relief can be granted, matters outside the pleading are presented to and not
         excluded by the Court, the motion shall be treated as one for summary judgment
         and disposed of as provided in Rule 56, and all parties shall be given reasonable
         opportunity to present all material made pertinent to such a motion by Rule 56.



See also Fed. R. Civ. Proc. 12(b).
                                                 5                     Unfoldment, Inc., CAB No. P-435


presented to the Board for decision based only on a written record. In such cases, the parties
usually are able to obtain a decision on the merits in less time than it might take for a court to
resolve a Rule 12(b)(6) motion or a summary judgment motion under Rule 56.

        That is not to say that the District may not move to dismiss a protest in lieu of filing its
agency report. Board Rule 306.1 authorizes an agency to file a dispositive motion in lieu of
filing the agency report, but generally such a motion will be based on a jurisdictional defect
rather than on a failure of the protester to state a claim for relief under the procurement law. The
Board itself may summarily dismiss a protest when it is "invalid on its face, or untimely filed, or
otherwise not for consideration." Board Rule 308.1. The Board infrequently invokes this
procedure and only with an abundance of caution. Cf. McBryde v. Amoco Oil Co., 404 A.2d 200,
203 (D.C. 1979) ("it is only where the facts material to a cause of action are shown to be
undisputed, and those facts so established indicate an unequivocal right to judgment favoring a
party that summary disposition will be permitted"). Where protest allegations are vague or
unclear, the Board often will have a conference with the parties soon after the protest is filed in
order to identify the protest issues. Where the District believes a protest ground fails to state a
violation of procurement law or regulation or is unsupported by the facts, the matter should be
addressed through the agency report on the merits in the first instance. Otherwise, the intended
fast-track nature of the protest procedures is frustrated. Where the agency believes that some of
the protest grounds are jurisdictionally defective while others are unclear or unsupported, it
makes good sense to file an agency report which both requests dismissal for allegations which it
believes are jurisdictionally defective and addresses the merits of the remaining protest
allegations on appropriate legal or factual grounds.

         In the present case, the remaining protest allegations are not so obviously invalid on their
face to merit dismissal. Although the allegations are mainly conclusory and barely supported
with facts, they make reasonably clear the applicable law and regulations at issue, and thus we
must address the allegations on their merits. The District, in fact, properly treats the merits by
pointing to specific factual or legal inadequacies of the remaining protest grounds. By including
exhibits with its motion to dismiss, such as the solicitation and relevant procurement
documentation, the District has supplied the Board with sufficient evidence to rule on the merits
of the remaining allegations. Unfoldment has had three opportunities to make its record: in the
initial protest, in the supplement, and in a response to the District's motion.

       Based on a review of the record, it is clear that Unfoldment has not met its burden of
proof on the remaining allegations. Although Unfoldment's factual presentation is rather
unorganized, it sets forth the following support for its allegations: the agency failed to include
Unfoldment in the market survey conducted prior to issuance of the solicitation even though it
had provided services in the past and had indicated interest in providing such services again; its
drug treatment program is superior to the Nellum's program; Nellum's program does not meet
standards set by federal court remedial orders; and Unfoldment's proposed program cost is lower
than Nellum's. Unfoldment's claim that its program is "better" than the awardee's ignores the
evaluation criteria established in the solicitation to rate the offers. Unfoldment does not
                                                 6                     Unfoldment, Inc., CAB No. P-435


challenge the actual evaluations and scoring of its proposal.4 Unfoldment also does not
challenge that its proposal was technically unacceptable for failing to address several required
areas of proficiency. See Precision Signal, Inc., 93-1 CPD ¶ 309, at 3 & n.1. Unfoldment does
not specifically identify how Nellum's proposed program fails to meet standards set by any
federal court order or how such an alleged failure affected evaluation under this particular
solicitation. Further, Unfoldment fails to show that either its or Nellum's cost proposal was
improperly scored under the solicitation's evaluation criteria. Finally, the agency's failure to
include Unfoldment in the initial market survey does not standing alone, or with the record as a
whole, approach the kind of evidence needed to show bias on the part of agency officials.

       The protest is dismissed in part and denied in part.

       SO ORDERED.


DATE: September 12, 1995                       /s/
                                              JONATHAN D. ZISCHKAU
                                              Administrative Judge

CONCURRING:

/s/
LORILYN E. SIMKINS
Chief Administrative Judge

/s/
PHYLLIS W. JACKSON
Administrative Judge




4
  As discussed above, any challenge at this point to the solicitation's evaluation criteria and their
relative weighting would be untimely.
