                    GOVERNMENT OF THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA
                           CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD


PROTEST OF:                                                        )
                                                                   )
       SOUTHERN MARYLAND RESTORATION, INC.                         )       CAB No. P-459
                                                                   )
       UNDER IFB No. 94-0081-AA-2-0-KA                             )

      For the Protester: Leonard Sacks, Esq. For the Government: Howard Schwartz and
Warren J. Nash, Assistants Corporation Counsel.

       Opinion by Chief Administrative Judge Lorilyn E. Simkins, with Administrative Judges
Jonathan D. Zischkau and Phyllis W. Jackson, concurring.

                                           OPINION

         Southern Maryland Restoration, Inc. ("Southern"), filed a protest regarding the rejection
ofits bid.on IFB No. 94-0081-AA-2-0-KA ("IFB") by the District of Columbia Department of
Public Works ("DPW"). The District argues that the Contracting Officer properly rejected
Southern's bid as non-responsive, based on Southern's failure to acknowledge receipt of IFB
Amendment No. 5 relating to a revised Davis-Bacon wage rate determination: Southern
telephoned DPW prior to submission date to inquire if DPW had issued more than four
amendments. Southern employees and District employees have submitted conflicting affidavits
concerning whether DPW employees advised Southern about the amendment the day before and
the day of the bid opening. Regardless of the conflicts among the affidavits, we conclude that
the record demonstrates that DPW violated procurement law and regulations by failing to add
Southern to the prospective bidder's list, which served as DPW's mailing list for the
amendments to the IFB, and failed to mail Southern Amendment No.5. DPW does not contest
that it did not add Southern to the "Prospective Bidders List," even though DPW had furnished
it with the IFB package, that it did not mailed Amendment No. 5 to Southern, and that the
"Prospective Bidders List" omits any mention of Amendment No.5. The District violated its
regulations governing the distribution of amendments to prospective bidders and in tum
improperly excluded Southern from the competition. This exclusion stems from a clear violation
of the Procurement Regulations and is also in contravention of D.C. Code 1-1181.1(b)(7), which
establishes as one of the statutory purposes "the fair and equitable treatment of all persons who
deal with the procurement system of the District government. "

       Accordingly, the Board sustains the protest.

                                            FACTS

       On April 2, 1996, DPW issued the above-captioned IFB in the open market for the
Rehabilitation of New York Avenue, N.E., South Dakota Avenue to the D.C. Line, and the
Rehabilitation and Widening of New York Avenue Bridges over South Dakota Avenue and the
                                        o       -2-              Southern Maryland Restoration, Inc. CAB No. P-459


Amtrak Railroad Tracks (Agency Report ("AR")). Bids were opened on June 5, 1996. (ld.)
DPW received bids from seven companies: Southern Maryland Restoration, Inc., Flippo
Construction Co., Inc. ("Flippo"), The Lane Construction Corporation, Cherry Hill
Construction, Inc., Kiewit Construction Company, Facchina Construction Co., and Fort Myer
Construction Corp. (ld.) Southern's bid was low at $20,687,733.50 and Flippo's bid was second
lowest at $23,881,741. (ld.)

        By letter dated July 11, 1996, DPW notified Southern that at the time of bid opening
DPW had deemed Southern the low, responsive bidder, despite the fact that Southern had failed
to acknowledge Addendum No.5. (AR, Exhibit 4). However, DPW in the same letter also
advised Southern: "Subsequent review of relevant case law dictate (sic) that we reconsider our
original responsiveness determination. As a result, we have rejected your bid as non-
responsive." (Id.).

        Addendum No.5 included a Davis-Bacon Act wage rate determination that increased the
rate of pay fOf"equipment operators andjronworkers. (AR, Exhibit 6.) The IPB contains a bir!..
bond package which includes instructions setting forth the requirements for acknowledgement
of all addenda. The instructions also warn that "[t]ailure to acknowledge receipt of all addenda
may result in rejection of bid."

       On July 11, 1996, DPW also notified Flippo that it had rejected Southern's bid as non-
responsive, and determined Flippo's bid to be the low, responsive bid. (AR, Exhibit 5). Flippo
had acknowledged receiving Addendum No.5 on May 28, 1996, a week before bid opening.
(AR, Exhibit 3). DPW has not awarded the contract to Flippo as yet. l

         On July 22, 1996, Southern filed the instant protest with the Board. The protester alleges
that it received only four addenda for this IFB in the mail. Southern also asserts that one of its
representatives contacted DPW by telephone on June 4, 1996, and asked if the bid on the
referenced project was due the next day and whether there were only four addenda. Southern
states that an unnamed DPW employee informed Southern's representative that the bids would
be opened on June 5 and that there were only four addenda to the IFB. Southern alleges that



     IOn June 17, 1996, Flippo filed a protest of the potential 'award to Southern based on
Southern's failure to acknowledge Addendum 5 (CAB No. P-456). On July 25, 1996, DPW
signed a Determination and Finding (D&F) for approval of award to other than low bidder and
forwarded the D&F to the Department of Administrative Services (DAS). The Director of DAS
has yet to sign the D&F. On August 7, 1996, after the District rejected Southern's bid, Flippo
filed a motIon to hold its protest in abeyance for sixty days to determine whether it would
withdraw its protest. On August 9, 1996, the District moved the Board to find that Flippo's
protest was moot. On August 21, 1996, the Board denied the Distript ',~ motion to qjsmiss
Flippo's protest as moot and granted Flippo's motion to have the matter held in abeyance for
sixty days. On August 27, 1996, Flippo filed Comments on the Agency Report. Based on our
rationale in this protest, the Board has dismissed Flippo's protest.
                                               -3-              Southern Maryland Restoration, Inc. CAB No. P-459


the same information was repeated in a telephone conversation the morning of June 5, 1996.
Southern also alleges that it first discovered at bid opening that DPW had issued five addenda
for this IFB. At the request of DPW, Southern acknowledged late receipt of addendum 5 and
advised DPW that the addendum would have no cost impact on its bid. (Protest, Exhibit B)

        In its Agency Report, filed on August 19, 1996, the District responded that contrary to
the allegations contained in the protest, DPW employees informed Southern's representatives by
telephone on June 5, 1996, that a fifth addendum had been issued for this IFB. (AR, Exhibit 7).
Barbara Nealy, a DPW contract specialist, signed a notarized affidavit stating that she had
spoken to a representative from Southern by telephone on June 5, prior to bid opening and
advised that addendum no. 5 had been issued and was informed that a representative from
Southern would pick up a copy of it. (ld.) The affidavit also states that before bid opening,
Stephen Fye of Southern picked up a copy of addendum no. 5 of IFB 94-0081 from her as well
as contract documents regarding another DPW solicitation. (AR, Exhibit 7). The District also
submitted an affidavit of Betty Brooks, also a contract specialist with DPW, which stated that
she saw Ms." Nealy give Mr". F)'e a copy of an addendum (but not necessarily addendum no." j
for.JFB 94-0081) (Id.). Finally, the District submitted the affidavit of another DPW employee
who stated that she talked to Mr. Fye about the missing addendum no. 5. (Id.)

         On September 9, 1996, Southern filed a response to the agency report. In its response,
Southern included DPW's Prospective Bidder's List for IFB 94-0081. (Response, Exhibit A4).
The list includes the names and addresses of 30 companies, but not the name and address of the
Protester, or of Kiewit Construction Company, one of the other seven bidders on this IFB. (Id.)
We do not know whether Kiewit's bid acknowledged any of the amendments or not. All of the
other companies which bid on this IFB are on the list. The list sets out April 2, 1996 as the date
the IFB was advertised, and indicates that a non-refundable fee of $150.00 was required. The
bid opening date was typed in originally as 5/6/96, but two handwritten revised dates appear,
which are crossed out and the final bid opening date of 6/05/96 is handwritten in on two of the
sheets, but not on third sheet. The original typed date of 5/6/96 appears on the third sheet of
the list. The list also includes an area to indicate when addenda were received (presumably by
the contract specialist) and mailed. (ld.) The forms indicate that Addendum No.1 was received
and mailed on 4-8-96, that Addendum No. 2 was received and mailed on 4-26-96, that
addendum No.3 was received and mailed on 4-23-96, and addendum No.4 was received and
mailed on 5-16-96. (Id.) The Prospective Bidders List makes no mention of Addendum No.5.
The Board has no information to show that any firm other than Flippo received Addendum No.
5.

        Protester's response to the District's Agency Report also includes the affidavits of
Stephen Fye and Jennifer Carter, an administrator for Southern. (Response, Exhibits A and B,
respectively). Mr. Fye states that Southern purchased a set of plans and specifications on or
about April 22, 1996 for $150. (Response, Exhibit AI) Attached to Mr. Fye's affidavit are the
amendments that Southern received. (Response, Exhibit A2). According to the date-stamp that
appears on the copies of the amendments included in Mr. Fye's affidavit, Southern received
Amendments Nos. 1 and 2 on May 14, 1996 and Amendment Nos. 3 and 4 on May 21, 1996.
                                                -4-               SouIhem MaJyIand Restoratioo, Inc. CAB No. P-4S9


. Mr. Fye states that Southern never received a copy of Addendum No.5 prior to bid opening.
  Ms. Carter states on June 4 and on June 5, 1996 just prior to bid opening, a DPW employee
  confirmed that there were only four amendments to the IFB.

                                          DISCUSSION

         The Procurement Practices Act, D.C. Code 1-1181, et seq. requires the fair and equitable
 treatment of all persons who deal with procurement in the District. The PPA's implementing
 regulations require that contracts are awarded after full and open competition. Full and open
 competition is designed to ensure that procurements are open to all responsible sources and to
 provide the government with fair and reasonable prices. Custom Environmental Services, Inc.,
 70 Compo Gen., 91-1 CPD 1578. In order to further these goals, a contracting agency has an
 affirmative obligation to use reasonable methods for the dissemination of solicitation documents,
 including amendments, to prospective competitors. U.S. Pollution Control, Inc., B-24891O, Oct.
 8, 1992,92-2 CPD 1231, and Electromagnetix Corp., B-249623, Oct. 29, 1992,92-2 CPD 1
 295.

        The District's procurement regulations in Title 27 concerning solicitation mailing lists
 provide:

    1510.3     All eligible concerns that have submitted solicitation mailing
               applications, or that the contracting officer considers capable of
               filling the requirements of a particular acquisition shall be placed
               on the appropriate solicitation mailing lists.

    1510.4     Prospective bidders shall be notified that they have been added to
               solicitation mailing lists.

    1510.5     An applicant shall be notified if it is not put on the list and of the
               reasons why the applicant was rejected.

        In addition, the District's procurement regulations concerning distribution of amendments
 provide:

    1517.4     The contracting officer shall send each amendment to all
               prospective bidders to which an IFB has been furnished.

    1517.5     The contracting offer shall distribute each amendment within a
               reasonable time to allow all prospective bidders to consider the
               information in submitting or modifying their bids.

        Prospective bidders also have a duty to avail themselves of every reasonable opportunity
to obtain solicitation documents. Republic Floors, Inc., 70 Compo Gen. 567,91-1 CPD 1579.
Normally, a prospective cOntractor bears the risk of not receiving a solicitation amendment,
                                                -5-              Southern Maryland Restoration, Inc. CAB No. P459


Normally, a prospective contractor bears the risk of not receiving a solicitation amendment,
unless it is shown that the contracting agency made a deliberate effort to prevent the firm from
competing, or even if not deliberate there is evidence (other than non-receipt by the protester)
that the agency failed to provide the amendment after the firm availed itself of every opportunity
to obtain it. Crown Management Services, Inc., B-232431, Ap. 20, 1989, 89-1 CPD , 393.
A prospective bidder's nonreceipt of a solicitation amendment, and subsequent elimination from
the competition, will not justify disrupting a procurement, unless evidence exists thaHhe agency
failed to comply with the applicable regulations governing the distribution of amendments.
Irwin-lurewiecz Corporation, B-249037, Oct. 20, 1992, 92-2 CPD 1 257 (emphasis added).

         In this instance, Southern was not included on the mailing list in clear violation of 27
DCMR § 1517. It is therefore the agency that must bear the risk of non-receipt. Southern
fulfilled its duty to avail itself of all reasonable opportunities to obtain the amendment.

        We do not believe that Southern was obligated to affirmatively inquire as to the existence
of additibnal amendments, although we believe that they pursued such a course. See Republic'
Floor, Inc. supra. Because DPW violated its regulations by failing to send Southern a copy of
Addendum No.5 and failing to properly add Southern to the solicitation mailing list, we resolve
the conflicting evidence regarding nonreceipt against the agency.

         Concerning the impact of 'the increased wage rate on the cost of contract performance,
Southern argues that the wage rate increases for the equipment operators and the iron workers
would have only a minor impact on the cost of the work, and that Southern confirmed in writing
that the amendment had no cost impact on its bid. Southern would have the Board waive its
failure to acknowledge Addendum 5. Southern cites 27 DCMR § 1535, which provides that
minor informalities or irregularities in bids may be waived by the contracting officer, and in the
instance of a bidder's failure to acknowledge receipt of an amendment to an IFB, the contracting
officer may waive the acknowledgment if "[t]he amendment involves only a matter of form or
has. either no effect of merely a negligible effect on price, quantity, quality, or delivery of the
item bid upon." 27 DCMR 1535.2(d)(2).

        A bidder's failure to acknowledge a material amendment by bid opening renders the bid
non-responsive, since absent such an acknowledgment, the government's acceptance of the bid
would not legally obligate the bidder to meet the government's requirements as identified in the
amendment. USA Asbestos Removal, B-252349, May 24, 1993, 93-1 CPD 1 410. An
amendment is material where it imposes a legal obligation (here, an increased wage rate for
equipment operators and ironworkers that the contractor would be obligated to pay) on the
contractor that was not contained in the original IFB. The materiality of the amendment is not
diminished by the fact that it may have little or no effect on the bid price or the work to be
performed. (Jd.) Moreover, a bid that is non-responsive may not be corrected after bid opening
since this would give the non-responsive bidder the competitive advantage of being able to accept
or reject the contract after bids are exposed simply by deciding to make it bid responsive or to
allow its bid to remain non-responsive. (ld.J
                                                -6-              Southern Maryland Restoration, Inc. CAB No. P-459


        In Davis-Bacon wage rate determinations, the contracting officer may not waive the
failure to acknowledge the amendment, even if the price impact is de minimis. The Board
follows the reasoning and logic of the Claims Court in Grade-Way Construction v. United States,
7 Cl.Ct. 263 (1985) which held that the failure of a bidder to acknowledge receipt of an
amendment containing a revised Davis-Bacon Act wage rate determination could not be waived,
irrespective of the price impact of the amendment. "Failure to acknowledge the amendment
containing the modified schedules and rates can be treated as a minor formality only if the
government can waive the provision ... Here, the payment of specified rates .. .is mandated by
the DBA and the government is powerless to waive such requirements." 7 CI Ct. at 272. The
revised wage rate clearly impacts on the wage rate which would be required to be paid to the
equipment operators and iron workers under the contract, and there is no evidence that
Southern's employees are covered under a collective bargaining agreement binding Southern to
pay wages no less than those prescribed by the Secretary of Labor. Weatherwax Electric, B-
249609, (Oct. 25, 1992) 92-2 CPD 1281. Because the protester's bid is non-responsive, DPW
may not award the contract to it.

         Finally, on September 18, 1996, during a telephone conference call with the parties, the
Office of Corporation Counsel informed the Board that the U.S. Department of Transportation,
Federal Highway Administration (FHW A) by letter.dated August 20, 1996, to DPW, stated that
they did not concur with the award of this contract to Flippo. FHWA had concurred originally
when DPW intended to award the contract to Southern as the low bidder. They recounted that
the District had found Southern's bid to be non-responsive based on the failure to acknowledge
Addendum No.5. FHW A also express concerri that "DPW may not have records to substantiate
that addendum 5 was provided to SMR by DPW, as it was to the other bidders." In that same
letter, FHWA implied that federal funding of the project could be jeopardized and encouraged
DPW to readvertise the project.

       The Board believes that based on these facts that it is in the best interest of the District
to cancel this solicitation and readvertise the project.



DATE: September 20. 1996                              ~g.~
                                                      Lonlyn . SImkins
                                                      Chief Administrative Judge

CONCURRING:




 k·[)~
J6.\athan D. ZischtGl
Administrative Judge
                    <&ouernment of tITe i1istrirt of Qlolumbia
                                  CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD
                                                              •
                               717 14TH STREET, N.W., SUITE 430
                                    WASHINGTON, DC 20005

                                                                    1202) 727-6597




                                                       DATE: September 20, 1996




TO:             Leonard A. Sacks, Esquire
                One Church Street, N.W., Suite 201
                Rockville, M2ryland ' 20850

                Howard Schwartz
                Warren J. Nash
                Assistants Corporation Counsel
                441 4th Street, N.W., Suite 1060
                Washington, D.C.  20001



SUBJECT:        CAB No. P-459, Protest of Southern Maryland Restoration,
                  Inc.
          Attached is a copy of the Board's opinion in the above-referenced matter.




                                                       ,fVJ ,;" ,
                                                       MIA J. HOUE
                                                                    I- it", "-
                                                       Clerical Assistant (Typist)




Attachment

cc:       Joseph H. Kasimer, Esquire
          Kasimer & Ittig, P.C.
      o   76~3 Leesburg Pike
          Fa~ls Church, Virginia  22043
                          •                                                       ,
                  GOVERNMENT OF THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA
                        CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD
                                       717 14th Street. N.W .. Ste. 430
                                          Washington. DC 20005
                                              12021 727-6597




               FACSIMILE TRANSMITTAL


                                                             DATE: September 20, 1996

                                              TO:               Leonard A. Sacks, Esquire




                                           AGENCY:



                               TELEPHONE #:                      (301)3738-2470



                                           FAX #:                (301) 738-3705




       FROM:

       NAME:          Mia House, Assistant Clerk


   TELEPHONE #        (202)727-6597

      FAX #:

Total Number Of Pagels):               7


COMMENTS:    _...::CAB=.:.;.:cN:.:.;o;:...;·~;......_P_-..;..45;:...;9~,~O.:...p_in_l_·o_n
                                                                                         _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ __
