                                                                                                                  [7678]

                        GOVERNMENT OF THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA
                              CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD


 PROTEST OF:

          M & M WELDING AND FABRICATORS, INC.                       )
                                                                    )   CAB No. P-542
          Under Solicitation No. CMHS-98-B-0002-LS                  )

         For the Prot~ster: 1. Scott Hommer, III, Esq., Venable, Baetjer and Howard, LLP. 'Fo~ the
 Intervenor: KristaL. Pages, Esq., Smith, Pachter, McWhorter & D' Ambrosio. For the District: Howard
 Schwartz, Esq., Warren 1. Nash, Esq., and H. Christopher Malone, Esq., Assistants Corporation Counsel.

        Opinion by Administrative Judge Jonathan D. Zischkau, with Chief Administrative Judge Lorilyn
 E. Simkins and Administrative Judge Phyllis W. Jackson, concurring.·

                                                 OPINION

           M & M Welding and Fabricators, Inc. ("M&M") protests emergency IFB No. CMHS-98-B-
  0002-LS for containing unduly restrictive specifications which required that the solicited centrifugal 'Nater
  chillers be manufactured on or after June 1993. In a supplem~ntal protest, M&M challenges an award
  made to American Combustion Industries, Inc. ("ACI"), the low bidder. Although it now appears that the
. manufacturing date requirement was unduly restrictive, we conclude that the agency committed no legal
  error because the requirement was reasonably based on infonnation the procuring agency obtained shortly
  before IFB issuance from six potential contractors, including M&M. We also conclude that the agency
  did not violate law orregulation in proceeding with an award to ACI rather than resoliciting, in view of the
  emergency conditions presented here. Accordingly, we deny the protest and"supplemental protest.

                                             BACKGROUND

         On May 21, 1998, the District's Department ofHurnan Services, Commission on Mental Health
 Services ("CMHS"), issued emergency Solicitation No. CMHS-98-B-0002-LS, for the provision and
 installation of two 1,OOO-ton centrifugal water chillers and associated equipment for the centr~1 air
 conditioning plant at St. Elizabeth's Hospital. ;(Agency Report ("AR") Ex. 1). Chillers are critically
 important to the operation ofSt. Elizabeth's Hospital during the air conditioning season which starts OIiMay
 15. The chillers are used for cooling the St. Elizabeth's Hospital, ensuring a healthy and therapeutic
 environment for patients and a proper temperature necessary for preserving critical medical supplies. (AR
 Ex. 2). The record discloses that an emergency procUrement was required because CMHS's Chief
 Contracting Officer, Mr. SidneyWise, had directed the previous rental supplier of chillers (tvl&M) to
 remove its existing chillers by May 27, 1998. M&M promptly removed the chillers, thus leaving.CMHS


 • Judge Booker, originally assigned as the presidingjudge, resigned from the Board prior to the disposition
 of this case.
                                                                                                                           (7679)

                                                             _2 -          M&M Welding & Fabricators, CAB No. P-542


        with no chillers on the premises for the air conditioning season which had already begun.

                The IFB specification provision challenged by M&M, Section C.3.1, requifed bidders to provide
        chillers which were not manufactured before June 1993 1

                The offerror shall provide chillers as specified below in paragraph "a" which were not
                manufactured before June 1993. The chillers shall contain the manufacturer's original serial
                number, model number, and any other manufacture's equipment identification numbers
                which will assist the Commission on Mental Health Services in determining the year the
                chillers were manufactured.

        (AREx. I).

                  Shortly before the time for bid opening on June 1, 1998, M&M filed its protest, alleging that
        Section C.3 .1 was unreasonable and unduly restrictive. M&M states in its protest,that on May 28, 1998,
        it first learned that there was only one supplier who could provide chillers meeting the June 1993
        manufacturing requirement.                                                        .             .

                 Mr. John H. Haizlip, responsible for defining the chiller requirements used in the soliCitation,.states
        in an affidavit that CMHS had a problem with the used chillers that had previously been installed by M&M
        in 1997. Those chillers were manufactured in approximately 1982 and they used type R-II refrigerant that
"   "
        was being phased out by the EPA. (Haizlip Aff. ~ 2, District's Response to M&M's Comments, filed July
        27, 1998). Thus, CMHS decided it would be best to purc.hase new chillers having a long useful life and
        which would use a newer type of refrigerant not subject to early EPA phase-out. (Id.). However, Mr.
        Haizlip discovered that newly manufactured chillers were riot readily available for CMHS' s emergency and
        immediate needs for chillers because it takes approximately 22 weeks to manufacture a cqiller.

                 Knowing that the useful life of a centrifugal water chiller is approximately 20 to 30 ye.  ars; Mr.
        Haizlip concluded ~at CMHS should procure chillers that were no older than 5 years so that they would
        have a useful life of 15 to 25 years. Moreover, Mr. Haizlip believed that a chiller manufactured after June
        1993 would use newer refrigerant types which would allow the chillers to operate more efficiently and
        which would not be subject to early phase-out by EPA. (Haizlip Aff. ~ 3). Mr. Haizlip then decided to
        survey potential vendors to determine the availability ofchillers manufactured in the past five years. On or
        about May 13, 1998, Mr. Haizlip surveyed six companies (M&M, ACT, NuTemp, Hurley Co., In Deck
        Power Equipment Co., and Precision'Mechanical Services, Ltd.) and representatives from all six
        companies, including Messrs. Oden and Mullican ofM&M, informed Mr. Haizlip that they could provide
        chillers five years old or newer. (Haizlip Aff. ~~ 4-8). Based on the results of his survey, Mr. Haizlip and
        CMHS determined that chillers manufactured within the last five years were readily available for lease or
        purchase. (Id. ~ 9; Burnette Aff. ~ 4). There is no specific reason why Mr. Haizlip chose the month of
        June in 1993 other than the fact that 5 years subtracted from the anticipated June 1998 procurement date
        yields June 1993.
                                                                                                               [7680]

                                                   _3 -          M&M Welding & Fabricators, CAB No. P-542


       . CMHS' s solicitation requested that bidders submit separate bid price schedules for a l20-day
lease and for a option to purchase the chillers. CMHS received bids from M&M, ACr, and American
Mechanical Services. No bidder took exception to the June 1993 chiller requirement in its bid. ACr was
the apparent low bidder:
                                                                               Total Cost
Bidder                   120 day lease           Purchase Price Option         Lease '& Purchase

ACI                     $487,424                 $460,000                         $ 947,424

American            $397,540                     $567,270                         $ 964,810
Mechanical Services
                                                                                                 ,
M&M                     $434,062                 $607,762                         $1,041,824

(AREx. 3). At the time of contract award, CMHS decided to exercise the option to purchase the chillers.
On June 5, 1998, CMHS executed a contract with ACI to purchase the chillers: The first chiller was
delivered approximately one week later and the second chiller arrived the following week.

        On June 5, 1998, the Chief Procurement Officer filed a determination to proceed with award and
contract performance during the pendency of the protest; based upon a fmding of the District's urgent and
compelling need to provide chillers in order to cool St. Elizabeth's Hospital during the summer season. On
June 12, 1998, M&M filed a motion challenging the determination. Although M&M does not seriously
dispute the critical need for the chillers, it points but that CMHS created the emergency condition when it
removed the existing chillers before it had procured their replacement. Although we agree 'with M&M that
the emergency condition was created by CMHS' s poor planning and questionable decision to remove the .
existing chillers before replacements could be delivered, we saw no reason to disturb the CPO's
determination to proceed because the immediate need for ,chillers at St. Elizabeth's .
                                                                                       Hospital was obvious.

        On June 19, 1998, M&M filed a supplemental protest challenging the award of the contract to
ACI. M&M argues ACI's bid was nonresponsive because the two boilers ACI installed were
manufactured by York International Corporation before1une 1993, and therefore did not comply with the
specifications.

         CMHS states that it inspected the chillers shortly after ACr had installed ~ern and discovered that
both were manufactured before June 1993. On June 23,1998, GMHS issued a notice to Acr to cure
the deficiency within 10 days. In its response to the cure notice, ACI stated that it had relied on the
representation ofits supplier, NuTernp, that the chillers met the specified June 1993 manufacture date.
NuTemp states that the chillers were delivered from the manufacturing plant in April 1993, and that final
testing, start-up, and acceptance occurred on June 8, 1993 . Thus, according to ACI and NuTemp, the
chillers meet the June 1993 "manufacture date" where "manufacture date" refers to when the units were
first put into operation. ACI also states tha~ only York made the centrifugal type chiller required by the
specification, that no other York chillers were available from any sOurce except the two Yark chillers from
                                                                                                                [7681]

                                                    _4 -         M&M Welding & Fabricators, CAB No. P-542


NuTemp, and that all three bidders had planned on installing the same two York chillers. 2 (District's July
27, 1998 Response, Ex. 5, at 2).

         In a written determination not to default terminate ACI, CMHS' s contracting officer found that the
York chillers were shipped from the factory on March 26; 1993, and both chillers were placed mto initial
operation on June 8, 1993. Although finding the chillers noncompliant with the manufacture date
requirement, the contracting officer concluded that termination was not warranted based on other factors
such as the unavailability ofthe chillers from other sources and the urgent need for the chillers. Instead of
a termination; the contracting officer and ACI negotiated a modification ofthe contract from a purchase
to a 120-day lease with a reduction in price to $432,000. CHMS also decided to issue a new solicitation
for the purchase ofchillers. On December 3, 1998, CMHS issued a new solicitation for the purchase and
installation of two new centrifugal chillers and accompanying equipment.
                                                           '.'
                                             DISCUSSION

         There is no dispute concerning our jurisdiction over M&M' s protest of the solicitation pursuant
to D.C. Code § 1-1189.3(a)(1) (Supp. 1998). However,. the District contends that the Board lacks
jurisdiction over M&M' s supplemental protest ofthe award to ACI because whether ACI' s chillers as
delivered comply With the specifications is a matter ofcontract administration. 3 The District cites our
decision in Shane Meat Co. , CAB Nos. P-339, etal., Jan. 8, 1993, 40D.C. Reg. 4885, where we stated
that a protester's argument that an agency improperly relaxed specification requirements after award is
"based on contract performance and thus is not a proper &round for a protest." 40 D.C. Reg. at 4899.
Al though Shane Meat states the general rule correctly, we, Iike the GAO, recognize exceptions such as
where the protest alleges that a contract modification or relaxation ofthe specifications after award have
prejudiced the original competition for the contract. For example, M&M cites Falcon Carriers, Inc., 68
Compo Gen. 206 (1989), 89-1 CPD ~ 96, reconsid.    .       on other. grounds. sub nom. Military Sealift
Command, B-232562, June 12, 1989,89-1 CPD ~ 550, where the GAO sustained a protest bec.ause
a material term of the solicitation was modified at the time of award and 14e protester ·had been
competitively prejudiced because the competition for the contract as modified could have been materially
different from the competition originally obtained. The GAO stated:

        Ifthe integrity ofthe competitive bidding system i~ to be maintained, agencies may not
        award contracts with the intention of significantly modifying them aft~ award; rather, an
        award must be based on the requirements stated in the solicitation.... If we find that the
        competition for the contract as modified would be mate!ially different from the competition


2 Although in its latest briefM&M weakly disputes the claim that there was only one source, it admitted
as much in its protest in order to show that the manufacturing date requirement was overly restrictive of
competition.

3The District also argues
                     .
                          that the supplemental protest' was
                                                          .
                                                             not timely filed. That argument is without
merit.
                                                                                                                  [7682]

                                                     _5 -          M&M Welding & Fabricators, CAB No. P-542


         originally obtained, then we generally will conclude that the award was i~proper and
         recommend resolicitation under revised specifications.

 68 Compo Gen. at 209. Where it is alleged that a proposed contract modification will be outside !be scope
  of the original contract, the question is whether the original purpose or nature of the contract would be so
  substantially changed by the modification that the original contract and the modified contract would be
  essentially different and the field of competition materially changed. See, e.g., Avtron Mfg., Inc.,
  67 Compo Gen. 404, 406-07 (1988), 88-1 CPD;         , 458, reconsid. sub nom. Defense Technology Corp.,
 ·67 Compo Gen. 614 (1988), 88-2 CPD ~ 273; Marvin J. Perry & Assocs., B-277684, Nov. 4, 1997,
  97-2 CPD ~ 128; American Air Filter Co., 57 CompoGen. 567 (1978), 78-1 CPD ~ 443 .

         In the present case, M&M filed a solicitation protest challenging the restrictive nature of a
 specification provision requiring a June 1993 chiller manufacturing date, which is precisely the contract term
  involved in M&M' s supplerp.eqtal protest challenging the award to ACr on the ground that the chill~rs
. actually delivered by Acr did not meet thatrequrrement. Clearly, both law and logic compel us to consider
  both protest grounds together. On the merits of M&M's solicitation challenge, the District argues that the
  June 1993 manufacturing date requirement was not unduly restrictive and met the District's minimUm needs.
  With regard to ACI' s ~elivery ofapparently non-compliant chillers, the District states that CMHS has not
  waived or modified that contract term but has elected not to terminate ACI's contract for default after
. weighing factors such as the unavailability ofcompliant chillers and the urgent need to keep the chillers in
  operation without disruption.

           We believe that the record adequately shows that the June 1993 chiller manufacturing date
  restricted competition to a single supplier, NuTemp, and that the June 1993 dat~ was not essential for
  CMHS acquiring the type of chillers that it desired. However, we are unable to sustain M&M' s protest
. of the solicitation because M&M itself, as well as the other prospective bidders, advised CMHS sh~rtly
  before the solicitation was issued that it could obtain chillers 5 years old or newer. It was based on the
  vendor survey information that Mr. Haizlip and CMHS determined that chillers manufactured within the last
  five years were readily available for lease or purchase. In light ofthe emergency conditions and immediate
  need for the chillers, and the receipt of.three unqualified bids (including one from M&M), it was not
  unreasonable for the contracting officer to proceed with an award to ACr rather than resolicit under revised
, specifications. In our view, CMHS effectively modified the manufacturing date requirement when it
  renegotiated the terms and price ofthe contract with ACr, but we do not find that action unreasonable
  under the emergency condi tions facing CMHS at the time. We presume that this fact pattern will not be
  repeated in future CMHS procurements.

         Accordingly, the protest and supplemental protest \lIe denied. M&M's request for its discovery
 costs, bid preparation costs, and legal costs is also denied.

 DATED: March 15.1999
                                                                                             [7683]

                                       -6-        M&M Welding & Fabricators, CAB No. P-542
                                             !,
                                                                                                ,.
CONCURRING:



~$'~
~tSI                      S      t;d
. Chief Aillninistrative Judge




                                             .,
