                           •
                 GOVERNMENT OF THE DISTRICf OF COLUMBIA
                                                                    •                                 [7731]



                       CONTRACf APPEALS ,BOARD


PROTEST OF:

THE ETHOS FOUNDATION, INC., and                      )       CAB No. P-581
                                                     )
THE GRACE CLINIC, INC.                               )       CAB No. P-582
                                                     )       (Consolidated)
Under RFP No. 8178-AA-NS-1-EW                        )   ,


       For the Protester, The Ethos Fowldation: Philip 1. Brelman, J.D., Ph.D., President. For
the Protester, The Grace Clinic: Michael Grace, Director. For the District: Warren J. Nash,
Esq., Chris Malone, Esq. and Howard S. Schwartz, Esq., Assistants Corporation COWlsel.

      Opinion by ChiefAdministrative Judge Lorilyn E. Simkins, with Administrative Judges
Jonathan D. Zischkau and Phyllis W. Jackson, concurring.

                                           OPINION

         The Ethos FOWldation ("Ethbs") challenges the award of a contract by the Office of
Contracting and Proc~rement ("OCP") tmder a solicitation to provide a First Offender Pre-
Trial Diversion Program for persons charged with Driving Under the Influence ("DUI") or
Driving While Intoxicated("DWI"). According to Ethos, the solicitation contained a
requirement that only firms attending the pre-proposal conference were eligible for award of
the contract. Subsequently, the Grace Clinic filed a protest asserting the same issue as Ethos.
 In addition to asserting that the award was limited to attendees of the pre-proposal conference,
Grace maintains that personnel from OCP removed a December 14, 1998 "Open Letter" from
its initial proposal and removed a February 26, 1999 letter from its best and final offer, thereby
adversely affecting the evaluation of its proposal and best and final offer. Grace also claims that
it has suffered compensable damages as a result of the District's failure to provide a contract for
a promised "transition period."

       We conclude that the solicitation was not limited to attendees of the pre-proposal
conference. We also conclu~e that OCP committed no error with regard to Grace's "Open
Letter." Further, we find no evidence of a promise by the District to provide a "transition
period" contract. A~cordingly; we dismiss in part and deny in part.
                        '.                   -2-
                                                                     .'
                                                            Ethos Foulldatioll, et al., CAB Nos. P-581) 582
                                                                                                              [7731]



                                      BACKGROUND

        On November 10, 1998, the Office of Contracting and Proqlremeni ("OCP") on behalf
of the Office of Corporation Counsel ("OCC") issued RFP No. 8178-AA-N S-I- EW ("RFP")
seeking qualified offers to provide a first offender pre-trial diversion program for persons cited
for driving under the influence and driving while intoxicated. 1 (Motion to Dismiss and Agency
Report of the District of Columbia, ("AR") Ex. 1). On November 23,1998, OCP held a pre-
proposal conference, pltrsuant to Se<;tion ,L. 24 of the RFP, which states:

       A mandatory pre-proposal conference will be held at lOAM on Monday,
       November 23, 1998 .... Prospective Providers will be given an opportw1ity to
       ask questions regarding this solicitation at the conference.

Representatives from Grace, Ethos, Second'Genesis and the Psychiatric Institute, Inc., as well
as the Program Manager, Program Assistant and Contract Specialist for the District~ attended
the pre-proposal conference. (AR Ex. 2). Ethos' representative at the pre-proposal conference
asked the Contract Specialist what the District meant by "Mandatory Pre-Proposal Conference."
The Contract Specialist responded that the phrase meant that only those organizations
represented at the 'pre-proposal conference would be considered for contract awatd. (Protest
of Ethos and Grace; Ward Aff. ~ 4). The awardee of the contract, The Family and Medical
Counseling Service, Inc. ("FMCS"), did not attend the conference. OCP issued two
amendments to the RFP after the pre-proposal conference. (AR Ex. 3).

        On December 15,1998, FMCS, Grace, Second Genesis and Ethos submitted proposals
to OCP. Grace also stlbmitted with its proposal an "Open Letter", dated December 14, 1998,
in which Grace described what it viewed as major issues which were not addressed in the RFP,
and discussed the experience that it had gained over the years as the provider of pre-trial
services. The letter states that it is not to be considered part of Grace's official response. (AR
Ex. 10).
        Section M.4 of the RFP allows for a maximum of 85 technical points, which are divided



IThe RFP describes that the OCC handles approximately 3,000 alcohol-related cases per
year. In order to minimize the substantial burden placed on the OCC and Superior Court
by the number of persons charged with driv.ing a motor vehicle while intoxicated or under
the influence of intoxicating beverages, the OCC instituted a first offender pre-trial diversion
program. The program fees are all paid for by the first offender. (See RFP Section C for
General Description of the Program).
                          •                -3-
                                                                    •
                                                          Ethos Foundation, et al., CAB Nos. P-58I, 582
                                                                                                          [7733]



among the following evaluation criteria: (a) staffing and organizational support - 25 points;
(b) program services-screening - 30 points; and (c) program services-treatment - 30 points.
(AR Ex. 1). Price accOlmted for up to 15 points and preference points accounted for up to 12
points. An offeror could therefore receive a maximum of 112 total points.

        On February 18, 1999, the Chief, General Crimes Section, OCC submitted to 'the
Contracting Officer the completed technical evaluation materials of the three-member
evaluation panel. (AR Ex.l1). The average scores of the offerors excluding price were: Grace
67.5; Ethos 75; Second Genesis 51.7; and FMCS 79.6. By letter dated February 18, 1999,
the Contracting Officer requested that the offerors submit by February 26, 1999, best and final
offers ("BAFO's"). The Contracting Officer instructed each offeror to submit complete total
annual projected costs for the base year and option year. (AR Ex. 12). Each offeror responded
by the deadline. (ARExs. 13,14,15 & 16). Second Genesis did not submit total costs forthe
base or option year in either its offer or its BAFO, and was deemed not to have complied with
the BAFO. (AR Ex. 17). Grace also submitted another letter with its BAFO questioning what
had happened to the "Open Letter" attached to its initial submission. Grace again included the
"Open Letter." (Id.)

       The Offerors proposed the following prices for the base and option year:

       Offeror               Base Year             Option Year              Total
       Grace                 $459,150              $459,150                 $ 918,300
       FMCS                  $665,336              $676,831                 $1,342,167
       Ethos                 $743,800              $766,114                 $1,509,914

(AR Ex. 20). The average combined technical and price scores for the four Offerors are
recorded in the Memorandum ofNegoti!1tions as follows:

       Offeror       Technical Score       Price Score    Combined Score             Rank
       FMCS            83.3                  10.3              93.6                    1
       Ethos           75                      9.1             84.1                    2
       Grace           67.7                  15                82.7                    3
       Genesis         51.7                   0                51.7                     4

(AR Exs. 17 & 20).

      On March 11, 1999, the Contracting Officer approved the award of the contract to
FMCS, and on April 2, 1999, awarded the contract to FMCS (AR Ex. 19). On or about April
9, 1999, the Contracting Officer notified the other offerors of the award to FMCS. (Id.). On
                            •                -4-
                                                                      •
                                                            Ethos Foundati07l, et at, CAB Nos. P-581, 582
                                                                                                            [7734]



April 9, 1999, Ethos filed its protest and on April 20,1999, Grace filed its protest. The
Contracting Officer supplemented the selection decision, price evaluation and responsibility
determination on May 6, 1999 (Ex. 20 & 21).

                              ANALYSIS

         We exercise jurisdiction over these protests pursuant to D.G Code § 1-1189.3 (Supp.
1997).

         A. ("Mandatory Pre-Proposal Conferen~eJJ Issue

        Both Ethos and Grace claim that they detrimentally relied on Section L.24 of the RFP
and the interpretation of that section by the Contract Specialist that the bidding was limited to
those who attended the pre-proposal conference. Both contractors assert that they would have
altered their proposal if they had known that contractors, other than the four who attended the
pre-proposal, were eligible for award. Grace is silent on how it would have changed its
proposal. Ethos, however, explains that it would have researched the experience and prices of
all competitors performing DWI/DU! services in the surrounding area. Ethos claims that the
District's oral and written representations induced it to limit its research, and to focus only on
the organizations which participated in the pre-proposal conference. Ethos claims that had it
known that the competition would not be restricted to the three entities who attended the pre-
proposal conference, its original and BAFO pricing would have been "radically different."
(Reply to Agency Report).

        While the District concedes that a contract spe~ialist told the participants that the award
would be limited to those attending the pre-proposal conference, the District argues that the
phrase "mandatory pre-proposal conference" is ambiguous, and subject to more than one
interpretation. We conclude that the language of Section L.24 does not clearly express an
intention to render rton-attending contractors ineligible to bid. The District correctly points
out that an oral statement at a pre-proposal conference is not binding upon the District, unless
the solicitation is amended in writing to reflect that statement. 2 The pertinent procurement



2 The minutes of the pre-proposal conference confirm that the attendees were told that the
award would be limited to those att~nding the conference. The minutes were provided to .
the Protesters for the first time in the Agency Report. Apparently, none of the conference
participants requested a copy of the minutes, which are released only upon written request
to the contra~ting officer or designated representative. (See 27 DCMR § 160S.2(d)). The
minutes cannot be construed as an amendment of the solicitation, but are simply a written
                               •              -5-
                                                                       •
                                                             Ethos foundation, etal., CAB Nos. P-581, 582
                                                                                                            [7735]




 , regulations provide that:

          The contracting officer shall inform all pre-proposal conference attendees of the
          following:              '

          (a) That remarks and explanations at the conference do not qualify or amend the
          terms of the solicitation; and

          (b) That the terms of the solicitation and specifications remain unchanged unless
          the solicitation is amended in writing.

  27 DCMR § 1605.3. Neither of the two amendments which OCP issued after the pre-
  proposal conference addressed the issue of the "mandatory pre-proposal conference." (AR Ex.
  4).

          Even if the contracting agency intended to make attendance at a pre-proposal conference
  a condition precedent to the award of a contract, we conclude that such a requirement would
  lUlduly restrict competition, and ~ould further no recognized legislative or procurement
  purpose. Computer Network Corporation, 50 Compo Gen. 355, 356 (1970). Nothing in this
  record suggests any valid reason to limit award of the con,tract to those firms which attended
  the pre-proposal conference. Regardless of whether it was reasonable for Ethos or Grace to
  believe that the District could properly limit competition to those who attended the pre-
. proposal conference, neither Ethos nor Grace have shown prejudice resulting from OCP
  receiving a proposal from FMCS.

          Ethos claims that had it known that the competition would not be restricted to the four
  entities who attended the pre-proposal conference, its original and BAFO pricing would have
  been "radically different." Ethos' argument necessarily fails because Grac;e, who was one of
  attendees and thus a known competitor, submitted the lowest price proposal and BAFO, and
  received the maximum 15 points for the price factor. Moreover, Ethos stated that its prices'
  "are not only considerably lower than our established prices, but they are as low as we can go '
  and still provide the quality of therapists and treatment for which Ethos is known." (AR Ex.
  14). Finally, even if Ethos had received the maximum points for price, it would not have
  displaced FMCS in the rankipgs.

          Grace, for its part, does not explain how it was prejudiced by OCP's receiving or


                               ,
   record of the pre-proposal conference.




                               t
                            •                  -6-
                                                                        •
                                                              Ethos Foundation, etal., CAB Nos. P-581, 582
                                                                                                             [7736]




considering a proposal from FMCS.

       This grOlmd of protest is denied.

       B. Removal ofGrace)s Letter from its Proposal and l!est and Final Offir

        Grace submitted a letter dated December 14,1998 with its initial proposal, which OCP
persOlmel removed. The letter entitled "Open Letter from Michae~ Grace of Grace Clinic, Inc."
states:

       This is not a complete list and this letter is not to be considered part of our official
       response. It is just some of my thoughts and concerns. As the current vendor I
       thought you might find them helpful. (Emphasis supplied).

        The December 14 letter presents arguments ih favor of continuing services with Grace
under the present arrangement, presents arguments against a competitive solicitation under the
subject RFP, and criticizes the program stnlcture proposed by the RFP. Grace learned that its
letter had not been seen by the technical evaluation panel ("TEP") during a conversation with
District personnel who asked for Grace's BAPO. In response, Gra~e wrote another letter dated
February 26, 1999, incorpora~ed the December 14 letter and attached it to its BAPO. The
                                l

Contracting Officer, not the TEP, reviewed tlle BAPOs. If Grace had wanted the December
14 letter to be considered by the technical evaluation panel as part of its proposal, it should
have stated as much. Because Grace stated in that letter that it was not to be considered part
of its response to the RFP, we find no error in the OCP's actions. We deny this grOlmd of
protest.

       C. Transition Period Issue

         Grace claims that it was promised a transition period, wl~ich would have allowed for
transfer of it database to the ,new contractor, \Vould have permitted a smooth transition of
clients with special needs from Grace, and would have aHowed Grace some warning to lessen
the economic impact resulting from loss of this contract. Grace claims that the delay between
the award of the cpntract to FMCS on April 2, and notice to it of the award on April 9 and a
subsequent period when OCC personnel apparently checked on the possibility of a contract
for a transition period was somehow evidence of deceit. Grace claims that it has suffered serious
economic damage in that all pew intakes for one. week (April 5-9) were directed to FMCS.
                                                      a
Grace apparently contemplated that time period as transition period for itself. Grace states that
the transition period was mentioned in the minutes from the pre-proposal conference and in
the letter from the Contracting Officer notifying it that it did not get the award.
                           •                -7-
                                                                      •
                                                             Ethos Foundation, et ai, CAB Nos. P-581, 582
                                                                                                            [7737]




       The minutes of the pre-proposal conference states:

       5. Transitions from one vendor to another shall be a smooth process where
       interruptions in service~ are limited. A change in vendors will require all parties
       to work together to accomplish the change.              '

(AR Ex. 2). The Contracting Officer's letter dated April 2, 1999, informing Grace that it had
not been awarded the contract states that "[ a] transition plan needs to be developed. Eric Ward
will call you in the' next few days."
                                  I
                              I


        Based on these two statemen~s, Grace concludes that it had been promised a contract to
cover a transition period, and that the actions of the District personnel in not awarding it such
a contract are a de~onstration of deceit. We do not address the wisdom of having a transition
period during which time Grace could have briefed the new contractor, and provided the
District with the database of past participants of the program. These are Issues of program
administration which are matters within the discretion of the contracting officer and are not
subject to this Board's review, absent a contract wherein Grace and the District agreed to a
transition plan. However, there is no evidence of a promise by the District or a resulting
contract to provide for a transition period. This ground of protest is therefore dismissed.

       Accordingly, we denY,these consolidated protests in part and dismiss them in part.

       SO ORDERED.                                      /1                              .


DATE: Tune 16, 1999 ,                              (j:iL{frr~·
                                                   LORIL
                                                               0M~
                                                         RSiGNS,
                                                    Chief Administrative Judge

Concurring:




JQNATHAN D. ZI CHKA.D
Aliministrative Judge
