                         •
                     GOVERNMENT OF THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA
                           CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD
                                                                     •                                     (7629)




PROTEST OF.                                                            )
                                                                       )
       EMERGENCY ASSOCIATES OF PHYSICIAN'S                             )    CAB No. P-500
       ASSIST ANTS & NURSE PRACTITIONERS, INC                          )
                                                                       )
        Under RFP No 7254-AA-NS-DD                                     )


       For the Protester Musie T Meresee, President, Emergency Associates of Physicians
Assistants & Nurse Practitioners. For the District Anne Cauman and Edward J Rich, Assistants
Corporation Counsel


                                              OPINION

        Emergency Associates of Physician's Assistants & Nurse Practitioners, Inc ("EAP'? or
"Protester") challenges the proposed award ofa contract to Riverside Healthcare, Inc ("Riverside")
The Protester claims that the selection panelists were biased, prejudiced, and acted in a discriminatory
fashion in their evaluation of its proposal We conclude that the Protester's allegations are without
merit and are not supported by p,roof Accordingly, we deny the protest

                                          BACKGROUND

         On March 7, 1997, the Department of Administrative Services ("DAS") issued, in the open
market, RFP No 7254-AA-NS-DD (the "RFP") for Physician's Assistants services to Department
of Corrections ("DOC") facilities On April 17, 1997, DAS issued Amendment No 1 to the
solicitation which extended the Closing date f9r receipt of proposals to April 24, 1997. On April 24,
1997, DAS issued Amendment No 2 to the proposal, clarifYing the contract type, changing the
estimated quantities, and extending the closing date for receipt of proposals to April 28, 1997

       The RFP's evaluation criteria weightings were (a) M 2 I-"Professional qualifications
necessary for satisfactory performance of the required services" (30 points), (b) M.2 1 2- "Past
performance on contracts with the District, or other governmental entities, and private industry in
terms of cost control, quality of work, and compliance with performance schedules" (10 points), (c)
M 2.1 3 "Specialized experience and technical competence in the type of work required" (l 0 points),
(d) M.2.l 4 - "Capacity to accomplish the work in the required time" (10 points), (e) M 2 1 5
"Acceptability under other appropriate evaluation criteria" (to points); (f) PRICE (30 points); (g)
M 2 2 "Maximum Evaluation Criteria Points" (100 points)                ,

       Three offerors submitted proposals in response to the RFP The offerors were EAP,
Riverside, and Diversified Medical and Informati<?n Services, Inc. ("Diversified") (Agency Report
                         •                       -2-
                                                                     •
                                                            f<:mergency Assoc oj PhysIcian's Assistants &
                                                                      Nllr!>e Practitioner!>, CAB No P-500
                                                                                                             [7630]




CAR") Exhibit 5)' Three DOC employees evaluated th~ proposals They were James F Coley,
DDS, Eliza J Ta'ylor, MD, and David E Link, Health Services Administrator for DOC Mr Link
served as the Chairman ofthe evaluation panel The evaluation panel scored the proposals as follows'

                               EAP                     Riverside                Diversified;

       Technical               23.3                     342                      505

       Price                   24.0                     120                      230

       Total                  473                       462                     73 5 11

       By memorandum dated May 13, 1997, Mr Link reported the evaluation results to Willard
Walton, DOC's Chief of Contracts and Procurement (AR Exhibit 6) By memorandum dated May
15, 1997, Mr. Walton sent the evaluation results to DAS with a recommendation to award the
contract to Diversified (AR Exhibit 7) ,

        The DAS Contracting Officer held discussions with each of the offerors on June 5, 1997. (AR'
Exhibits 8, 9, 10, 11, 12). By letter of the same date, he requested that each offeror submit Best and
Final Offers ("BAFOs" ) by June 6, 1997 addressing the following issues

               Elaborate on specific experience with regard to providing Physician Assistants
               in the District of Columbia or other jurisdictions

       •       Provide evidence offinancial resources which would support this engagement,
               i:e letter of credit

       •       Provide an organizational chart indicating the names of employees and their
               specific responsibility, additionally name the emploY,ee primarily responsible
               for this engagement

       •       Address price relative to the Best and Final Offer.

       •       Outline a strategic plan to perform this engagement specifically, indicate start-
               up time and the scheduling and training requirements for each Physician
               Assistant.

        •      Provide copies of certification of licenses for Physician Assistants who will
               work on this engagement



liThe panel's evaluation memorandum mistakenly identifies Diversified's total score for'the initial'
evaluation as 73.7 rather than 73 5.
                         •                     '. -3-
                                                               I
                                                                         •
                                                             E/Ilergency Assoc. of Ph VSICl an 's A ss,,<,tan/s &
                                                                       Nurse Pracfl{/Oners, CAB No. P-500
                                                                                                                    [7631]




       Each of the offerors submitted a BAFO in response to the District's request. (AR Exhibits
9, 10, 11). The evaluation panel evaluated the BAFOs and scored them The evaluati011 panel"~
average evaluation scores after the BAFOs were as follows.

                       EAP                     Riverside                           Diversified

       Technical       29.3                      50.6                                   35

       Price           25.0                      28.3                                   24

       Total           543                       78.9                                   59   °
(AR Exhibit 13).

         Riverside'received the highest average score of78 9 Diversi~ed received an ave;age score
of59 21, and EAP received the lowest average score of 54 3 points.' The evaluation panel scored EAP
as follows.

                                                                               Average           Max
Name of Evaluator                 Link            Coley            Taylor      Score             Points

Professional Qualifications         20              21              5            15 3              30
Past Performance                     5                   I                        2.0              10
Specialized Experience               4                   9          °
                                                                    9             73               10
Capacity to Accomplish Work          3                   6          5             47               10
Price                               30                  25          20           25.0              30
Total Individual Scores             62                  62          39

Mr Link, transmitted the results to Mr. Walton by memorandum dated June 18, 1997 (ARExhibit
13) By memorandum dated June 20, 1997, Mr Walton forwarded the BAFO evaluation results to
the DAS Contracting Officer with a recommendation consistent with that of the panel that award be
made to Riverside in the amount of$2,446,080. Mr Walton stated that the price was determined to
be fair and reasonable (AR Exhibit 14) DOC explained the scoring of prices in a memorandum
dated July 10, 1997 (AR Exhibit 16)

       By memorandum dated July 10, 1997, Mr. Walton responded to a concern of the DAS
Contracting Officer ,that Mr. Link's scoring of price for Riverside should have been lower. Mr
Walton stated that the award should be made because Riverside received the highes't score for



2IProblems noted since the initial evaluation, including Diversified's filing for bankruptcy un,der
Chapter 11, and the fact that some of its staff had "failed to show at the work site due to
nonpayment of wages" resulted in the lowering of Diversified's score (AR Exhibit 14)
                          •                       -4-
                                                                       •
                                                             Emergelicy AsoSoc of Ph yoSICl an 's AssIstants &
                                                                      Nurse PractItIoners, CAB No P-500
                                                                                                                     [7632]




technical and price from the three evaluation panelist, and even ifth;e price score were reduced by the:' :
maximum point value assigned to this criterion, Riverside's would still remain the highest scored
proposal. (AR Exhibit 16)

       On July 5, 1997, EAP filed this protest with the Board challenging the proposed award to
Riverside 31

        The District filed an Agency Report on 'July 29, 1997 EAP challenged the District's refusal
to disclose certain documents on the basis that they were protected By,orders dated August 21 and
22, 1997, the Board determined which documents were to be released to EAP, On September 2,
1997, the Protester filed a response to the Agency Report which was supplemented on September
15, 1997,41 By order dated October 15, 1997, the Board ordered that the protest would be decided
on the record without a hearing. There were several motions filed by the parties SI and the record was
closed on December 3 1, 1997


                                            DISCUSSION

                                                                                                                 ,   ,


A.      Discovery and Related Issues

        Despite being advised by the Board of various dangers and disadvantages in proceeding pro
se, EAP pursued this protest without the benefit of an attorney During a telephone conference with
the parties held within one month of filing the protest, the -Board informed EAP that it would be
unable to review certain proprietary information contained in the proposals of the other offerors,
because EAP did not have outside counsel admitted under a protective order (July 24, 1997, Order




3/The District distinguishes EAP's challenge to award to Riverside under the RFP which is the
subject of this protest (RFP No 7254-AA-NS-DD) from the a~ard to Riverside under Contract
No 7414-AA-NS-3-DD for a period of30 to, 90 days No timely protest of the latter contract
was ever raised (AR note 5),                      '

4/EAP filed a handwritten response to the Agency Report that the Board ordered the Protester to
resubmit in typewritten format. Board Rule 107.8 requires that all submissions filed with the
Board be typewritten               '

SIO n December 19,1997, EAP filed a list of three people's names identified as individuals who

"might be able to witness (sic) regarding the bias involved against our organization" [emphasis
added] and asked that the Board request written statements of the individuals. The Board denied
'the Protester's request.
                        •••                     -5-
                                                                  •
                                                           Emergency Assoc ofPh VSICIan 's AssIstants &
                                                                                                          [7633]



                                                                   Nurse PractItIOners, CAB No. P-500

and Report on Telephone Conference) See 27 DCMR §1610 61 EAP was informed that, as it
competitor, it would not be permitted access to a significant portion of its competitors' proposals.
Less than a month later, the Board again informed EAP that it would not have access to proprietary
documents contained in the proposals of the other otferors, unless it retained counsel properly
admitted under a protective order. EAP was informed that all documents would be available to an
attorney pursuant to a protective order. (August 21, 1997, Order and Report on Telephone
Conference) In its Response to the Agency Report of the District of Columbia, dated September,
15, 1997, EAP complained that it was being unfairly denied access to documents that it was entitled
to receive through the Freedom of Information Act? The Board reviewed the complete record III
camera The record contained, among other things, the proposals and BAFO of the other offerors
and source-selection material We determined that substantial portions of the record were protected
from disclosure because they contained proprietary, confidential, and source-selection-sensitive
material See Board Rule 104, 45 D C Reg 1389 (Mar 13, 1998)


B.      Merits

Allegations of Bias, Prejudice" and Discrimination

        EAP states that "We have a strong [beliefJ that there was a biased" prejudiced, and
discriminating behavior against our company and its members by some of the selection panelists"
EAP argues that Mr Link, the chairman of the evaluation panel, had developed a working
relationship with Diversified, since he had been a contract administrator of the previous Physician's
Assistant service contract which was performed by Diversified. EAP argues that Mr Link should
not have been allowed to sit on the evaluation panel because he would be biased in Diversified's



6/During the pre-award period of a competitive sealed proposal (CSP) procurement, only the
contracting officer and others specifically authorized may transmit technical or other information
and conduct discussions with prospective contractors (27 DCMR § 1610 2) No District
employee or agent shall furnish information to a prospective contractor if, alone or together with
other information, it might give the prospective contractor an advantage over others However,
general information that is not prejudicial to others may' be furnished upon request (27 DCMR
§16103)

  7/Although we do not have any jurisdiction over EAP's FOIA request, we note that the District of
  Columbia Freedom pfInformation Act (D.C. Code § 1-1521, et seq) provides that governmene
.,information shoul~ be available to the public, absent a compelling reason for non-disclosure D C
  Code § 1-1524 alSo provides the following exemption from disclosure '

        (a)(l) Trade secrets and commercial or financial information obtained outside the
        government, to the extent that disclosure would'result in 'substantial harm to the
                                                                  •
        competitive position of the person from whom the information was obtained
                           •                      -6-
                                                                         •
                                                              Emergency Assoc. of PhysIcian's Assistants &
                                                                      Nurse PraclI/lOl1erS, CAB No. P-500
                                                                                                             (7634}




favor EAP also alleges that Mr Link made a statement to one of the Protester's references as
follows' "Mr Meresee to get this contract HA .. HA .. HA, 'no way with his bad English" (Response
to the Agency Report of the District of Columbia, dated Sept. 15, 1997)
                               .                                     ,
         In reviewing allegations of bias, the Board presumes that Government officials, acting in their
official capacity, do so in good faith. A protester must come forward with evidence to overcome the
presumption Because government officials are presumed to act in good faith, we do not attribute
unfair or prejudicial motives to them on the basis of inference or supposition Ameriko MalIltellance
Co., B-253274, Aug 25, 1993,93-2 CPD ~ 121 Thus, where a protester alleges bias on the part
of government officials, the protester must provide credible evidence clearly demonstrating a bias
against the protester or for the awardee and that the agency's bias translated into action that unfairly
affected the protester's competitive position. Advanced Sciellces, inc., B-259569.3, July 3, 1995,.,
95-2 CPD ~ 52                                                                                           ..

         The District correctly states that Mr Link's role as a contract administrator of the previous
contract does not support an allegation of bias and that the statement attributed to Mr Link by which
EAP intended to demonstrate: bias is unsupported The fact that Mr Link was a contract
administrator for the previous contract for physician's assistants services does not raise a presumption
of bias nor shift the burden of proof from EAP. In fact, Riverside, not Diversified, was selected for
contract award and there was no allegation that Mr Link worked with Riverside. EAP alleged that
its reference, Mr Leroy Hackett, could attest to the alleged statements of Mr Link. The Board
afforded EAP the opportunity to provide evidence in support of its allegations but EAP failed to
provide an affidavit ofMr Hackett or other supporting evidence Therefore, EAP has not carried
the burden of proof required for us to find bias on the part of Mr Link

Evaluation Challenges

        EAP challenges several of the agency's evaluation's In reviewing a protest which challenges
the propriety of an agency's evaluation of proposals, it is not the function of the Board to
independently evaluate proposals and to substitute the Board's judgment for that of the agency In
determining the propriety of an evaluation, we examine the record and we will question an agency's
technical evaluation only where the record shows that the evaluation does not have a reasonable basis, .
lacks supporting documentation, is inconsistent with the evaluation criteria listed in the solicitation,
or otherwise violates law or regulations Health Right, et al., CAB Nos P-507, 510, 511 ,Oct 15,
1997,9 PO 7372, 7395, Biochenllcal Genetics -.Newborn Screelllllg Laboratory, CAB No P-470,
Feb. 25, 1997,"44 D.C Reg 6795,6800.             .

        The protester has the burden of affirmatively proving its case and the fact that the protester
 does not agree with the agency's technical conclusions does not in itself render the evaluation
'unreasonable COlltellnjoimatioll Systems, Illc., B-220215, Jan 15, 1986, 86-1 CPO ~ 44, 1,lltOIl
 Systems, Inc., 63 Compo Gen. 585, 84-~ CPO ~ 317.
                         •                       -7 -
                                                                     •
                                                            ft.IlIergency Assuc of Ph},slClan 's A..,slslanls &
                                                                        Nurse Praclltloners, CAB No P-500
                                                                                                                  [76351




          EAP argues that an analysis of its bid price and the calculation of its overhead costs would
 have given the evaluator an ample opportunity to determine if EAP could have' afforded an
 "attractive" pay. This complaint appears to refer to a comment of evaluator, Dr. Eliza Taylor,
 regarding criteria M 2.1.6, "Price", that EAP's "[H]ourly rate would not be attractive to an
'experienced P A; believe. there would be a problem recruiting and maintaining staff" (AR Exhibit 13,
 Selection Evaluation Form signed and dated 6/18/97). The evaluator awarded 20 points to EAP for
 this factor out ofa possible 30 points On the record presented here, EAP has not demonstrated that
 the evaluation lacked a reasonable basis or was inconsistent with the evaluation criteria

        EAP also challenges Dr Taylor'S conclusion that EAP had "little work experience on
individual bases "1 EAP argues that its personnel average of 14-16 years experience "is not little"
Dr Taylor awarded EAP 5 points out of a maximum of 30 on criteria M 2 I, "Professional
Qualifications Necessary For Satisfactory Performance of the, Required Services" (AR Exhibit 13,
Selection Evaluation Form signed and dated 6/18/97) Dr. Taylor's score of 5 points is significantly
lower than the other evaluators'scores of 20 and 21 points Upon review of the experience
information, we find that EAP's individual staff experience ranged from less than one year to over
23 years EAP claimed 12 years average experience in its proposal and 14-16 years in its protest
The record reflects that approximately nine of EAP's proposed staff had no past experience as
Physicians Assistants while several others had five years or less experience Dr Taylor may have
presumably 'scored EAP lower than the other offerors upon consideration of this information
However, neither increasing this score by another 15 points to within the range of the other
evaluators or by a maximum of25 points gives EAP a score high enough to place it above Riverside

        In conjunction with the statem~nt that an average of 14-] 6 years "is not little", EAP stated
that "a zero credit is unrealistic." This statement does not make sense for the professional
qualification criterion M 2.1, because no evaluator gave EAP a "zero" for this criterion The only
"zero" credit that was awarded EAP was for M 2.1.2, "Past Performance On Contracts With The
District, Other Governmental Entities, And Private Industry In Terms of Cost Control, Quality of
Work, and Compliance With Performance Schedules" Dr. Taylor gave EAP no points with the
comment ''No previous experience with District entities" That evaluation is supported by the record
which shows that EAP, as a business entity, had no previous experience with the District, other
governmental entities, or private industry

        EAP argues that the evaluators failed to consider information relevant to the criteria regarding
capacity to accomplish the work 'in the required time EAP specifically charges that Mr Link did not
consider' (1) the notarized affidavit that stated that Mr Meresee, EAP's President, intended to resign
from DOC; (2) that EAP had other staff to perform the job, or (3) that Mr. Meresee was the only
member of the organization who was currently employed by DOC The comments were "Transition
period needed Proposed employees would need to resign current positions with DOC to work
Conflict of interest"; "Current DOC employees. 'Conflict of interest for some. No adult correctional
experience for others"; "Two proposed employees out on L WOP from DOC. Recent graduates for
May. No statement from present contractor (Oak Hill) as to performance." (AR Exhibit 13) EAP
has not offered any evidence that Mr. Link or the other evaluators failed to consider the relevant
information provided with EAP's proposal Upon review of the record we find no evidence of
                             •                    -8-
                                                                      •
                                                             E/llergency Assoc. of PhysIcian's A SSI.s tants &
                                                                       Nurse PractItIOners, CAB No P-500
                                                                                                                 (7(l36)




unreasonableness in the conclusipns of the evaluators' Approximately seven ofEAP's proposed:staff
members were employed at DOC at the time of the proposal and it was reasonable for the evaluators
to consider the impact on the transition time needed for those individuals. (AR Exhibit 2)

Other Challenges to the Evaluation
                         ,
       EAP also claims (1) a discrepancy in the evaluation criteria and the technical points for
Section M 2.1, (2) the evaluation scores do not reflect the average' score that was provided the
Protester, (3) an inability to respond to the arithmetical error discussion raised in the Agency Report;
and (4) that it did not change anything in its BAFO and therefore the evaluation of the BAFO's
should not have affected its scores. EAP adds that it had the best technical proposal and the lowest
prIce

        EAP appears to be arg~ing that there are no objective criteria for Section M 2 1 5 which
provides a maximum of 10 points for" Acceptability under other appropriate evaluation criteria" The
evaluators decided not to score under this criterion because it is unspecified. 8/ Therefore, the
maximum score that a firm could receive from each individual panelist was reduced from 100 to 90
total points The total cumulative points a firm could receive was reduced by 30 from 300 to 270,
This change was explained in a memorandum dated May 15, 1997, from Willard Walton to Kevin A-
Green. (AR Exhibit 7) No offeror including EAP was prejudiced by the panel's action
       With regard to EAP's arguments that the evaluation scores do not reflect the average score
which was provided EAP, the Board rejects this vague and unsupported allegation.

         As for various arithmetical errors, none had any material effect on the ranking of the offerors
 The District acknowledges arithmetical errors in the initial evaluation results in a memorandum dated
 May 13, 1997 9/ (AR note 3). (See, AR Exhibits 6 and 7) The District also notes that there are
 arithmetical discrepancies between the average scores for the offerors' BAFOs reported in
 memoranda dated June 18, 1997, and June 20, 1997. The scores in the June 18, 1997 memorandum
 appear to be the correct numbers. (AR Exhibit 13) The errors in the June 20 memorandum appear
'to be due to (I) ct transposition error in Diversified's tirst score (a score of 30 was typed as 20),
 and (2) a transposition error in Riverside's score (a 1 was transposed as a 5) (AR Exhibit 14) The
 District notes, further, that these discrepancies had no effect on the ranking of the offerors (AR, at



8/The contracting officer should have corrected or deleted this provision prior to issuance of the
RFP If the error was discovered after issuance, the contracting officer should have issued an
amendment correcting or removing the criterion

9/The District states' «Riverside's total score is listed as 462 while Riverside's total score is
listed as 47 3 [The score of) 46.2 appears to be the correct figure. The difference between the
two figures appe~rs to be due to both an arithmetical error and a different rounding of an
averaged figure from .6 to.7 Using the .6 figure is consistent with all the other rounding of the,
averaged figures."
                          •                      -9-
                                                                      •
                                                             Emergency Assoc. of PhyslclOn ·S Assistants &
                                                                     Nurse PractitIOners. CAB No. P-500
                                                                                                             [7637J




2-4, n.3-4) The Protester claims an inability to respond to arithmetical errors acknowledged by the
District because it has not been granted access to enough information to formulate its response The
Board finds this argu~ent to be ~ithout merit due to EAP's voluntary ryfusal to obtain counsel who
could have obtained access to protected information on EAP' s behalf In any event, the arithmetical
errors in the final evaluation sCQres for Div~rsified and Riverside had no effect on the ranking of the
three offerors.

         EAP's argument that it did not change anything [from its- initial proposal] in its BAFO and
 therefore its scores should not have been affected does not take into account that the evaluators
 sought BAFOs and additional information in order to more fully evaluate proposals. The law provides
 for an agency's solicitation, evaluation, and scoring ofBAFOs Here, all offerors were afforded the
 opportunity to provide information in their BAFOs that could have affected -relative standing \01 In
'the context of the evaluation where the relative merits of offerors' BAFOs are compared and scored,
 EAP's failure to change anything in its BAFO simply does not compel the conclusion that its relative
 standing would remain unchanged

        The PP A requires that the contracting agency's award of a contract under competitive sealed
proposals shall be made to the responsible offeror whose proposal is determined to be the most
advantageous to the District government, considering price and the evaluation factors set forth in the
request for proposals. D.C. Code § 1-1183.5(f). Underlying the statute's emphasis on a legitimate
evaluation of competitive proposals are the corresponding statutory requirements that the RFP shall
indicate the relative importance of each evaluation factor and that the RFP's statement of work is to
be used as a basis for the evaluation of proposals. Id. § 1-1 ~83 5(c)-(d) The District's implementing
regulations prescribe procedures the contracting officer must follow in making the selection decision
based on the agency's evaluation of BAFOs

        16226           After evaluation of the best and final offers, the contracting officer
                        shall select that source whose best and final offer is most
                        advantageous to the District, considering only price and other factors
                        included in the solicitation

        16227           The contracting officer shall prepare supporting documentation for the
                        selection decision that shows the relative differences among the
                        proposals and their strengths, weaknesses, and risks in terms of the
                        evaluation factors The supporting documentation shall include the
                        basis for the selection.

27 DCMR §§ 1622.6-1622.7 (1988). See RecyclingSoilltions, fllc. CAB No. P-377, Apr. 15, 1994,
42 D.C Reg. 4550,4583




IOIBoth EAP and Riverside improved their technical and price scores, while Diversified's technical
score fell and its price score improved by a mere 1 point.
                          •                      -10-
                                                                   •                                  (7638]

                                                            Emergency Assoc of PhysIcian's AssIstants &
                                                                    Nurse PractItIOners, CAB No P-sqo

         We conclude that the information ,in the record - the contemporaneous evaluation scoring',
 the summary statements of evaluated strengths, weakness and risks, and the post-protest
 amplifications - provided a sufficiently clear and reasonable basis for the award decision, Certainly
 there was enough information available to understand the agency's rationale for the award decision.
 The Board finds that the evaluation was reasonable and in accordance with the evaluation criteria
 listed in the solicitation and that there were no violations of procurement laws or regulations
 Therefore, the protest is DENIED.                         '

         SO ORDERED.

 DATE: December 15, 1998




, CONCURRING




~0;&~AdL~
 LORIL     E. SIMKINS
 Chief Administrative Judge




   JO ATHAN 0 ZIS         KAU
.' Administrative Judge
                      •
                 GOVERNMENT OF THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA
                                                                  •
                       CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD
                              717 14m STREET, N.W., SUITE 430
                                 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20005
                                       (202) 727-6597 (Ole #)
                                       (202) 727-3993 (Fax #)

                                             ***

                                     December 15, 1998




TO:          Musie T. Meresee, President
             Emergency Associates of Physician's
               Assistants & Nurse Practitioners, Inc.
             1761 S Street, N.W., Suite #3
             Washington, D.C. 20009

             H. Christopher Malone, Esquire
             Warren 1. Nash, Esquire
             Howard S Schwartz, Esquire
             Assistants Corporation Counsel
             Office of the Corporation Counsel
             441 4th Street, N.W., 10th Floor
             Washington, DC 20001


SUBJECT:     CAB No. P-500, Protest Of Emergency Associates of Physician's Assistants
                                        & Nurse Practitioners, Inc.

      Attached is a copy of the Board's Opinion denying protest
