                                                                                                    [7621]

                     GOVERNMENT OF THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA
                           CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD


PROTEST OF.                          )
                                     )                '
       EDUCATIONAL IN-ROADS,         )
       a division of SYLVAN LEARNING )                j CAB No. P-552
       SYSTEMS, INC.                 )               !
                                               )     ;
       Under RFP No 028-NS-0-6-X               )     i
       (Special Education Assessments)         )
                                               i                   ,
      For the Protester: Keefe B demons, Esquire, Goodwin, Proctor & Hoar, LLP. For the
Government. Warren J. Nash, and Chris Malone, Assistants Corporation Counsel.

       Opinion by Chief Administrative Judge Lonlyn E Simkms with Administrative Judge
Claudia Booker, concurring                    l
                                               i
                                    OPINION AND ORDER

        Educational In-Roads, a division of Sylvan Learning Systems, Inc ("In-Roads") protests the
District of Columbia Public Schools' (DCPS) decision to exclude In-Roads' proposal to provide
certain educational services to the Division of Special Education under RFP No. 028-NS-0-6-X
("RFP" or "Proposal") from the competitive range The District filed a motion to dismiss
challenging the timeliness of the protest We deny the District's motion to dismiss because In-
Roads filed its protest in accordance with the guidelines given in the RFP. We also find that the
DCPS's decision to exclude In-Roads' proposal from the competitive range was unreasonable.
Accordingly, we sustain the protest.

                                         BACKGROUND

        On June 10, 1997, DCPS issued RFP No. 028-NS-0-6-X to engage the services of one or
more contractors to provide an array of professionals to perform psychological, speech and language
evaluations and social histories of students for the Special Education Branch of the Public Schools.1
 In-Roads had been an incumbent provider of these services since 1995. Proposals were originally


       'The letter mailed to prospective offerers states-

            [T]he District of Columbia Public Schools Division of Special Education is
       seeking services of Contractors who can provide the services of qualified state
       licensed certified school psychologists, clinical psychologists, psychiatrists,
       neurologists, occupational and physical therapists, social workers, and audiologists
       to perform initial, triennial and/or requested re-evaluations, and to participate in the
       admission and review process of special education services beginning July, 1997
       through August, 1997                          |
                                                                                                         [7622]

                                               -2-            Educational In-Roads, CAB No P-552
                                                     I
due on June 20, 1997. On June 19, 1997, DCPS issued Addendum No. 1 which expanded the
category of professionals to include speech therapists and changed the date of submission to June
27, 1997. (Agency Report ("AR"), Exhibit 2). DJCPS issued a second Addendum on June 25,
specifying the required number of slots that DGPS would need, and informing prospective
contractors that the contract, including options, would not exceed five years. (AR, Exhibit 3) DCPS
received 13 proposals on June 27, 1997. (AR, Exhibit 4).

       By memorandum dated June 27, 1997, the Chief of Contract Administration for DCPS
forwarded to the Director of Special Education, a technical evaluation plan ("TEP") delineating
responsibilities and providing basic procedures for evaluation committee activities (AR, Exhibit 5).
 The TEP provides                                    !
                                                     !
       Each member of the EC [Evaluation Committee] shall evaluate every technical
       proposal independently and without consultation with other EC members. Members
       shall evaluate one proposal at a time, shall assign a numerical score to each
       evaluation criteria and shall write a narrative justifying that score and identifying
       strengths and weaknesses Upon completion of the individual evaluations, the EC
       Chairperson will compile and summarize the independent scores of the committee
       members and then obtain a consensus score! for each offerer, thus ensuring that the
       end result represents the consensus scores of the panel as a whole. The EC
       Chairperson is responsible for the review of numerical scores and narratives to ensure
       that they are compatible. [Emphasis added ]

        The TEP sets forth the following evaluation criteria: (A) Experience, demonstrated ability,
and reputation in similar projects - 30 points; (B) Qualifications, experience and competence of key
and other personnel to undertake project - 30 points; (C) Equipment and facilities available - 10
points; (D) Cost proposal - 30 points. The evaluation criteria also included the following formula
which DCPS indicated it would use in the evaluation of offerer's price proposals-

       Lowest Price Proposal           x      30 = Points Awarded
       Price of Proposal Being Evaluated

        The TEP provides that the competitive range is to include all proposals that have a reasonable
chance of being selected for award and determined on the basis of cost or price and other factors
stated in the solicitation (AR, Exhibit 5)

        On July 28, 1997, the Director of Special Education submitted the completed technical
evaluations to the Contract Administration Chief. The EC consisted of eight members, none of
whom evaluated all of the proposals. Some EC members evaluated two or three proposals, others
evaluated five or six, and one evaluated eleven proposals. One proposal was not evaluated by any
EC member. (AR). The EC members did not evaluate cost or determine the competitive range.
(AR, Exhibit 7) Two EC members rated In-Roads and based on the average scores of all of the
offerers, In-Roads was the second highest offerer. (AR, Exhibit 7).
                                                                                                          [7623]

                                               -3-           Educational In-Roads, CAB No P-552

        On August 29, the Office of Contract Administration requested best and final offers
("BAFO's") from all offerors by September 3,1997. (Exhibit 8). All thirteen contractors submitted
BAFO's (See Consensus Matrix for Technical Evaluation, AR, Exhibit 9). Between August, 1997
and January 1998, there was apparently no activity concerning the selection of an offerer for these
services. However, in January of 1998, the Special Education Branch conveyed its urgent need for
these services to the Office of Acquisitions and Contracts Management (OACM).2 (Exhibit 13) A
Memorandum of Negotiations, dated April 20, 1998, outlines the course of action that DCPS
undertook. Id Recognizing that the initial evaluation was flawed, DCPS decided that it could
correct its errors by having another Technical Evaluation Panel made up of three staff members of
Special Education Division review each proposal.

       The TEP evaluated each proposal using the criteria set forth in the RFP. The TEP discussed
the proposals, agreed upon a composite evaluation score for each proposal, and established that the
competitive range was 80 to 100. The second TEP evaluated the proposals as follows

       Firm                             Experience   Qualifications   Equipment       Cost        TOTAL

       JoanE Gildemeister                     27             25               9        27          88
       Institute for Life Enrichment          27             26               8        22          83
       Hospital for Sick Children             25             24               6        26          81
       WATS                                   22             25               6        16          69
       American Therapy Services              20             24               9        19          72
       Georgetown Umv Child Development       24             30               10       24          88
       Riverside Health Care                  24             24               8        24          80
       Therapist Unlimited                    22             29               6        26          83
       Blackwood-Elhs & Campbell              25             26               9        23          83
       Sunspectrum                            27             26               7        24          84
       Sylvan Learning Systems                24             24               8        16          72
       Psychological Assessment & Services    10             25               8         6          49
       Therapy Management Services            9              10               0        16          35

        The second TEP recommended the award of contracts to: (1) Joan Gildemeister
(2) Institute for Life Enrichment; (3) Hospital for Sick Children; (4) Georgetown University Child
Development Center; (5) Riverside Health Care; (6) Therapist Unlimited; (7) Blackwood-Ellis and
Campbell, and (8) Sunspectrum. (AR, Exhibit 9). In a memorandum dated February 27, 1998, the
Special Education Division requested that the OACA also consider awarding contracts to American
Therapy Services, In-Roads, and Washington Assessment and Therapy Services, "given the myriad
of assessments that are in our backlog " (Id)

       On March 16, 1998, the Contracting Officer sent letters to the eight potential awardees

       2
         The Agency Report contains documents from two different DCPS offices, the Office of
the Chief Operating Officer/Director of Facilities Contract Administration, and the Office of
Acquisitions and Contracts Management, which relate to the supervision of the RFP. There is
no clear distinction between the roles of these Offices. The Board has therefore used the name of
the Office which appears on the letterhead of the document under discussion.
                                                                                                     [7624]

                                                              Educational In-Roads, CAB No P-552

requesting that they respond to a second BAFO by March 20, 1998.3 (AR, Exhibit 10). Only seven
of the eight contractors responded. On March 30, 1998, the Contracting Officer sent another letter
to the seven potential awardees requesting information on costs and inquired about their definitions
of the required services While assuring the contractors that DCPS was not attempting to change
their cost proposals, the letter states.

       As we reviewed the cost proposal, we found that offerers used several definition for
       the required services. This made cost evaluation difficult. As a way of assuring that
       everyone uses the same definitions, we are requesting that you provide cost
       information using the enclosed format.
       (AR, Exhibit 11).

       Attached tq the March 16 letter is a form requesting information on contractors' hourly cost
for each type of evaluation and the estimated number of hours per evaluation. The form also
requests information about the cost of various kinds of consultation services, and other direct costs.
Id Following submission of the third BAFO, DCPS conducted negotiations with the seven
contractors. Four of the seven contractors were selected in April, 1998 to provide services DCPS
determined that they would "best meet DCPS' minimum needs at the best value cost-wise." (AR,
Exhibit 13). Requirement contracts were executed in May of 1998 with Therapist Unlimited,
Riverside Health Care, Drs. Blackwood-Elhs and Campbell, and Joan Gildemeister (AR, Exhibit
14)

        By letter dated March 31, 1998, the Procurement Officer informed the five offerers who
scored less than 80 points that their proposals were found to be outside the competitive range (AR,
Exhibit 12) Apparently In-Roads' exclusion from the competitive range was based on its costs
relative to the other proposals. While its costs rating was low in comparison to other proposals, its
technical scores were relatively high In-Roads' technical proposal scores were in fact the same as
Riverside's, one of the eventual awardees By letter dated April 8,1998, In-Roads protested DCPS'
finding that its proposal was outside the competitive range and requested that the Procurement
Officer reconsider the decision. Having received no response to its April 8 letter, on May 15,1998,
In-Road's attorney penned another letter to the Procurement Officer requesting a response by May
22,1998 Again DCPS did not respond. On May 29,1998, In-Roads filed a written protest with the
Superintendent of Schools based on the dispute and protest procedures set forth in the RFP (Section
7 of the General Provisions, Protest, Exhibit A). In-Road's protest received no response from the
Superintendent. On July 20, 1998, In-Roads filed its protest with the Board. It referred to section
7 of the General Provisions of the RFP and Title 5 DCMR §§ 3700 et seq , as the basis of its timely
filing with the Board and described the failure of DCPS to respond in any fashion to its concerns
about its exclusion from the competitive range.


        3
          The second BAFO sought information on the contractor's* (1) intake, tracking and
monitoring procedures; (2)quahty control procedures; (3) capacity for bilingual evaluations; (4)
procedures to inform parents/guardians of the assessments; (5) internal training procedures on
state and federal standards, and (6) procedures to ensure confidentiality.
                                                                                                      [7625]

                                               -5-             Educational In-Roads, CAB No P-552



        Jurisdiction

         In accordance with the Procurement Practices Act, Board Rule 302.2 requires that protests
other than those concerning improprieties in a solicitation, "shall be filed with the Board not later
than ten (10) business days after the basis of the protest is known or should have been known,
whichever, is earlier." 45 DCMR § 1415 (March 13, 1998). The District argues that In-Roads'
protest was untimely filed with the Board, since it was filed at our offices more thanl 0 days after the
basis of the protest was known. (Motion of the Distnct of Columbia to Dismiss, or in the Alternative
Agency Report). The District contends therefore that the Board has no jurisdiction to decide this
case

         In-Roads filed its protest in accordance with the dispute and protest procedures outlined in
the RFP, which accords with the dispute and protest regulations found in the Board of Educations
Regulations, 5 DCMR §§3713 and 3714 (1991). The Board of Education Regulations provide that
an aggrieved party shall file its protest in writing with the procurement officer within ten days after
the aggrieved party knows or should have known the facts giving rise to the protest. The provisions
require the procurement officer to render a written decision within ten days of receipt of the protest
stating the reasons for the decision. The dispute and protest regulations afford an aggrieved party
an appeal of the procurement officer's decision to the Superintendent, who shall have 20 days from
date of receipt of the protest to render a decision. The protester is then afforded 30 days to appeal
the Superintendent's decision to this Board. In-Roads followed these procedures. In-Roads filed
its protest with the Board 111 days after DCPS first notified it that its proposal was determined to
be outside the competitive range, however, it filed its protest with the DCPS' procurement officer
in less thanl0 days after the procurement officer's March 31 letter

        On April 9,1997, the effective date of the Procurement Reform Amendment Act ("PRAA")
all departments, agencies, instrumentalities, boards and commissions of the District of Columbia,
including independent agencies, such as DCPS, became subject to the Procurement Practices Act
("PPA") and the Procurement Regulations found in 27 DCMR. (See D C Code § 1 -1181.4(a), D C
Law 11-259 § 101(b), 44 DCR 1423). The Board of Education's protest and dispute regulations
found in Title 5 are no longer applicable to DCPS solicitations Persons aggrieved by the
procurement decisions of DCPS are required to file protests directly with the Board. However, In-
Roads' failure to file its protest directly with the Board does not defeat our jurisdiction.

        We treat the timely filing of protests with the procurement officer of DCPS as the functional
equivalent of filing with the Board. Fort Myer Construction Corp., CAB No. P-452, July 23,1996,
44 D.C. Reg. 6476. This result is especially compelling here because the protest was misfiled as a
result of DCPS's express filing instructions in the RFP, and because the procurement officer failed
to forward to the Board the misfiled protest, as we explicitly instructed in Fort Myer. The
procurement officer and the Superintendent decided instead to ignore the offerer's protests. In-
Roads meticulously followed the protest procedures set forth in the RFP

        The RFP was issued two months after the effective date of the PRAA, which invalidated the
                                                                                                       [7626]

                                               -6-            Educational In-Roads, CAB No P-55'2

use of the dispute and protest procedures found in 5 DCMR and required the filing of protests
directly with the Board DCPS had ample time prior to the issuance of the RFP and certainly prior
to the submission of proposals to delete the incorrect filing procedures and inform offerors of the
correct filing procedures for protests and appeals We believe it would be inequitable to punish In-
Roads for DCPS's error. The District's motion to dismiss is denied. Further, DCPS should
immediately amend, if it has not previously done so, the provisions of any solicitations which it
issues in order to advise the public of the correct protest and dispute procedures.

       Merits

       In-Roads initially asserted as grounds of protest its exclusion from the competitive range
based on information that it was ranked in second place among a field of thirteen contractors. In-
Roads did not know of the irregularities in the initial evaluation in which members of the evaluation
team evaluated different proposals, and of DCPS's attempt to correct this error by convening another
technical evaluation panel For the first time, In-Roads learned of possible new grounds of protest
m the District's Motion to Dismiss /Agency Report In-Roads timely filed its Reply to the District's
Motion to Dismiss/ Agency Report and asserted new grounds of protest. In-Roads contends that
DCPS performed a flawed cost evaluation and a flawed technical evaluation4

       Cost Evaluation

       In-Roads claims that DCPS's evaluation of its cost proposal was flawed in several respects.
Preliminarily, the protester points out that the information on the cost evaluation contained in the
Agency Report is fragmentary, does not present a clear picture of DCPS's actions in excluding In-
Roads from the competitive range, or explain why In-Roads received a score of only 16 out of a
possible 30 points for its cost proposal This in itself is an deficiency in documentation which
prevents a clear analysis of how the evaluations were reached. However, we have sufficient
information based on our review of the RFP, the records of the evaluations provided, the Agency
Report and Protester's Reply, to determine that the second TEP evaluation, which placed In-Roads'
outside the competitive range, was unreasonable

       In negotiated procurements, agency selection officials have broad discretion in determining
the manner and extent to which they will make use of the technical and cost evaluation results in
making their determination. General Servs Engineering, Inc., B-245458, Jan. 9, 1992, 92-1 CPD
f 44 The record of the agency's action must demonstrate that the agency acted "reasonably and in
accord with stated evaluation criteria, and not in violation of procurement laws and regulations "


       4
         The District originally notified the Board that it intended to file a response to the Reply
of Educational In-Roads to Motion of the District of Columbia to Dismiss Protest or, in the
Alternative, Agency Report However, on the date that the reply was due, the District wrote
"that we adequately responded to the protester's concerns m our previous Motion to Dismiss"
(Letter dated October 6, 1998, from Warren J Nash, Assistant Corporation Counsel, to the
Board)
                                                                                                     [7627]

                                               -7-            Educational In-Roads, CAB No P-552

Scientech, Inc B-277805.2, Jan. 20 1998, 98-1 CPD f 33. Furthermore, the determination of
competitive range is primarily a matter of administrative discretion, which we will not disturb absent
a clear showing that the determination is reasonable Coopers & Lybrand, 66 Comp. Gen. 216
(1987), 87-1 CPDTf 100, Besserman Corp , 69 Comp Gen. 252 (1990), 90-1 CPD^f 191. However,
if there is a close question of acceptability or if the noted deficiency is susceptible to correction
through relatively limited discussions, then the inclusion of the proposal in the competitive range
is in order. Besserman Corp , 69 Comp Gen. 252, supra

         We find that DCPS's formula for assigning scores to cost proposals was improperly
employed and resulted in In-Roads' unfair exclusion from the competitive range. Although the
Agency Report does not explain the scoring of cost proposals, the formula in the RFP indicates that
points were assigned on the basis of a ratio of the proposed cost to the lowest offered cost. This
formula presumes that an offerer would propose a "total price" that could be compared with the total
price of other proposals based on the same services. However, offerers were not required to bid on
the same items or the same quantity of services. Moreover, there was no uniformity in the definition
of services to be provided. It was not until after the competitive range determination had been made
that DCPS sought information from offerers about what they had included in their offers based on
a common set of definitions and m a consistent format that would permit an accurate evaluation of
proposed costs The initial cost formula appearing in the RFP was improperly employed for these
reasons. These factors prevented a true comparison of costs at the time that DCPS made its initial
determination of competitive range The proposed costs for the thirteen contractors were not based
on the same assumptions and no meaningful comparison could be made for purposes of determining
the ultimate cost to the government.5 Rather than clarifying the differences between the proposals,
the use of the cost evaluation formula which was not based on a common set of definitions, distorted
the differences and obscured the relative merit of the proposals. DCPS' erroneous cost evaluation
unfairly disadvantaged In-Roads.



        5
         The protester challenged the validity of DCPS's cost evaluation by making a
comparison of several components of its proposal to other proposals. For instance, In-Roads'
proposal price of $338 for speech therapy evaluation was within $13 of awardee Riverside's
price of $325. (Protester's Reply, Exhibit A and Agency Report, Exhibit 13) Riverside and In-
Roads were the only contractors who proposed a price for a "full evaluation". In-Roads'
proposed price for full evaluation was $995 while Riverside's price was $890 for full evaluation
However, Riverside had other costs for travel and materials in the amount of $21,000 which were
included in In-Roads' proposed price, and extra charges of $65 per hour for parent/teacher and
DCPS consultation which In-Roads proposed to provide at no cost It is also not clear that DCPS
confirmed that Riverside's full evaluation included the same components as In-Roads'. The
Protester pointed out several other anomalies in a comparison of proposed prices between In-
Roads and several successful awardees which DCPS' perfunctory cost comparison methodology
produced. Contrary to DCPS' assertion that based on its evaluations the proposals, it received
the best value or price, it appears that it may not have receive the best value or prices because its
cost analysis was flawed
                                                                                                     [7628]

                                                              Educational In-Roads, CAB No P-552

        The competitive range consists of all proposals that have a reasonable chance of being
selected for award, generally including proposals that are technically acceptable or reasonably
susceptible of being made acceptable through discussions. Kranco, Inc , B-242579, May 1, 1991,
91-1 CPD1425. The competitive range is to be "determined on the basis of cost or price and other
factors, in accordance with the evaluation criteria that were stated in the solicitation." 27 DCMR
1620 1 Cost or price may emerge, as it did here, as the dominant factor in determining whether
proposals fall within the competitive range. A flawed determination of cost, which causes an
otherwise acceptable proposal to be prematurely excluded from the competitive range, is
unreasonable. The record does not support the agency's conclusion, that at this stage in the
procurement, In-Roads did not have a reasonable chance for award.

         While In-Roads claims that the technical evaluation was also unreasonably performed, we
find it unnecessary to review those grounds of protest, since we are satisfied that the protester was
prejudiced by the actions of DCPS in the evaluation of In-Roads' cost proposal and in In-Roads'
exclusion from the competitive range based on DCPS's evaluation of its costs. Accordingly, we
sustain the protest.

         The record indicates that contracts were awarded to four companies in May, 1998. We are
hesitant to disturb the on-going provision of services to DCPS by terminating those contracts, given
the difficulties DCPS has had with special education compliance. Yet, we believe that a remedy can
be devised which does not jeopardize DCPS' efforts to timely perform assessments of students, but
also^accords with notions of fairness for the protester We, therefore, order that within ten days from
the date of this decision that the Office of Corporation Counsel arrange a telephone conference with
the Board, In-Roads and program and procurement officials of DCPS, to discuss possible remedies.
 Further, we order payment of reasonable bid preparation costs. In-Roads shall prepare those costs
and present them to DCPS before the date set for the telephone conference.

SO ORDERED.

DATE October 27. 1998
                                                                   SlivlKlNS
                                                       Chief Administrative Judge

01
^-Afrud i£
CLAUDIA BOOKER
                 ).~^K
                     \J^QG   k
Administrative Judge
