                                                                                                             [7719]

                      GOVERNMENT OF THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA
                            CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD



PROTEST OF:

       GREGORY L.A. THOMAS, ESQ.             )
                                             )                  CAB No. P-579
       Under Solicitation No. WAS-9009-AA-KG )



      For the Protester: Gregory L.A. Thomas, Esq. For the Government: Howard Schwartz, Esq., and
Warren J. Nash, Esq.; Assistants Corporation Counsel.

      Opinion by Administrative Judge JonathanD. Zischkau, with ChiefAdministrative Judge Lorilyn E.
Simkins and Administrative Judge Phyllis W. Jackson, concurring.

                                              OPINION

        The District of Columbia Water and Sewer Authority ("W ASA") awarded a contract for labor
relations and employment law services to Venable, Baetjer, Howard and Civiletti, LLP ("Venable") after
receiving and evaluating offers from eight prospective contractors. Gregory L.A. Thomas, Esq., protested
the award on the basis that the evaluation and selection was flawed. W ASA has moved to dismiss the
protest on the ground that as the seventh ranked offeror, Thomas lacks standing because he is not in line
for award even ifhis protest were sustained. We agree with W ASA that Thomas has not demonstrated
that he would be in line for award even ifhis protest were sustained., Accordingly, we dismiss his protest
for lack of standing.

                                           BACKGROUND

        On November 9, 1998, W ASA issued Solicitation No. W AS-9009-AA-KG for laborrelations
and employment law services. (WASA' s Motion to Dismiss, Ex. 1). The RFP required offerors to submit
proposals by December 9, 1998. Eight prospective contractors timely submitted proposals. A technical
evaluation panel ("TEP") evaluated and scored the proposals in December 1998 and ranked the eight
offerors according to their overall scores which included technical and price criteria as follows:

        Venable, Baetjer, Howard & Civiletti, LLP ("Venable")            84.14

        Proskauer Rose LLP ("Proskauer")                                 76.31

        Morgan, Lewis & Bockius, LLP ("Morgan")                          73.91

        Hunton & Williams ("Hunton")                                     69.70
                                                                                                               [7720]

                                                   -2-             Gregmy L.A. Thomas, Esq., CAB No. P-579


       Lindner & Marsack, S.C. ("Lindner")                                64.00

       D.C. Office of Labor Relations                                     50.22

       Gregory L.A. Thomas, Esq.                                          47.07

       Herbert L. Jackson, Esq. ("Jackson")                               25.80

(ld, Exs. 2, 4, and 5).

        On January 19, 1999, the TEP recommended that the contracting officer select Venable as the
awardee. The TEP also recommended that the contracting officer award Proskauer a contract limited to
issues pertaining to the reorganization of WAS A's Office of the Chief Financial Officer.

     The contracting officer awarded a contract to Venable on February 25, 1998. (ld, Ex. 6).
W ASA has not yet awarded a contract to Proskauer.

        On March 17, ·1999, Thomas filed his protest alleging that the award to Venable was improper
because: (1) WASA awarded to Venable without conducting discussions; (2) Venable's skills and
qualifications were not sufficiently better than Thomas' to justify a 53 percent price differential; (3)
WASA's selection of Venable placed undue emphasis on reputation rather than on the solicitation's
evaluation criteria; (4) W ASA improperly made an award only to Venable when the solicitation
contemplated multiple awards. On April 6, 1999, W ASA moved to dismiss the protest on the ground that
Thomas, ranked seventh of eight offerors, lacks standing. In his opposition to the motion, Thomas argues
that W ASA improperly conducted discussions with the three top-ranked firms, Venable, Morgan, and
Proskauer. Thomas also complains that the fifth ranked firm, Lindner, received a disproportionally higher
score for technical qualifications than did Thomas and Jackson. Thomas also objects to the high scores
that Proskauer and Hunton received for the approach and methodology criteria while Thomas and Jackson
received much lower scores for the same criteria. Finally, Thomas questions why Morgan received a
significantly higher score than Thomas for the criterion relating to key persOlmel.

                                             DISCUSSION

        We exercise protest jurisdiction pursuant to D.C. Code § 1-1189.3(a) (Supp. 1998).

        Thomas' broad claim that WASA failed to consider the teclmical and price criteria in its evaluation
and selection is without merit. The record demonstrates that W ASA properly evaluated the proposals
based on the criteria set forth in the solicitation and selected the highest ranked offeror, considering all
technical and price criteria.

       The many other allegations in Thomas' protest and opposition merit no additional discussion
because we agree with W ASA that Thomas is not in line for award even if Thomas' other challenges could
                                                                                                                  [7721 ]

                                                    _3 -             Gregory L.A. Thomas, Esq., CAB No. P-579


be sustained. To avoid the obvious standing problem, Thomas suggests that he has standing because he
is challenging "the integrity ofthe manner in which the agency officials scored all the offerors." This general
argument cannot substitute for showing how the six higher-ranked offerors were improperly evaluated such
that Thomas would be in line for award ifhis protest grounds were sustained. Having carefully reviewed
the evaluation and selection record and the arguments raised by Thomas, we conclude that Thomas has
not shown any reasonable possibility of being in line for award even ifhis evaluation challenges were
sustained. Even accepting Thomas' conclusory allegations on improper evaluation and scoring ofthe five
highest-ranked offerors, Thomas fails to demonstrate how he could surpass any of the six higher-ranked
offerors.

        Accordingly, we dismiss Thomas' protest for lack of standing.
                                                            ,



DATED: May 11, 1999




CONCURRING:



~,1~,0~i&4J
LORIL        E. IMKINS
Chief Administrative Judge
