                                                                                        [7461]

                    GOVERNMENT OF THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA
                          CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD


PROTEST OF:

       JHARBO LIMITED, INC.                                 )
                                                            )       CAB No. P-527
        Under RFP No. DC-RP-97-09                           )

      For the Protester: Donald M. Temple, Esq. For the Government: Mark D. Back, Esq.,
Deputy General Counsel, D.C. Lottery & Charitable Games Control Board.

       Opinion by Administrative Judge Jonathan D. Zischkau, with Chief Administrative Judge
Lorilyn E. Simkins and Administrative Judge Phyllis W. Jackson, concurring.

                                           OPINION

          JHARBO Limited, Inc., protests the cancellation of the request for proposals made by the
District's Chief Procurement Officer. The Chief Procurement Officer determined that cancellation
was necessary because the contracting agency failed to meet privatization requirements set forth
in D.C. Code § 1-1181.5b (1997 Supp.). JHARBO contends that cancellation determination is
legally insufficient because the Chief Procurement Officer had no authority to cancel the RFP or
to conduct a pre-execution review of any proposed award under the RFP. We conclude that the
Chief Procurement Officer has statutory authority to cancel a solicitation, under the proper legal
standards, and to conduct a pre-execution review of any procurement action subject to the
Procurement Practices Act. The Lottery concedes that the privatization requirements were not
satisfied here and JHARBO does not challenge the factual basis upon which the cancellation was
based. Accordingly, we deny the protest.

                                             FACTS

       On June 9, 1997, the District of Columbia Lottery and Charitable Games Control Board
issued an open market Request for Proposals (uRFPU) No. DC-RP-97-09 soliciting sealed
competitive proposals for (1) production and/or broadcast services for the Lottery's mid-day and
evening draw programs, and (2) broadcast of the Multi-State Lottery Association's game
drawings. (Agency Report (UAR") Ex. 1) . The Lottery issued an Amendment No. 1 to the RFP
which cancelled sections 5 and 6 of the solicitation related to broadcast of the Lottery's mid-day
and evening draw programs and the Multi-State Lottery Association's game drawings.

        After receipt of initial proposals and best and final offers from the D.C. Office of Cable
Television, the incumbent contractor, and JHARBO, the Lottery requested pre-execution review
by the District's Chief Procurement Officer ("CPOU) who is the Director of the Office of
Contracting and Procurement. On November 1, 1997, the CPO executed a determination and
findings cancelling the RFP on the ground that the solicitation violated the privatization
requirements of D.C. Code § 1-1l81.5b (Supp. 1997). The CPO noted that the production
                                                                                        [7462]




                                               -2-             JHARBO Limited. Inc.• CAB No. P-527


services are currently being performed by District employees and consequently any initiative to
privatize these functions should comply with the privatization requirements of subsection (a) of
D.C. Code § 1-1181.5b. That section provides in relevant part:

       Any con~t, including a lease or othe~ ~~nt, or any contracting policies and
       procedures relatirig to such contracts, to provide goods and services to or on behalf
       of the District government shall provide that:

                (1) With respect to contracting out to provide goods or services to or on
       behalf of the District government that currently are provided by employees,
       department, or agencies of the District government, a cost-benefit analysis
       comparing the in-house costs of providing the service with the costs associated with
       contracting for the service shall be completed for each contract proposed pursuant
       to this section;

               (2) Contracting out will provide savings over the duration of the contract
       of at least 5 % ;

               (3) Any contractor who is awarded a contract that displaces District
       government employees shall offer to any displaced employee a right-of-first-refusal
       to employment by the contractor, in a comparable available position for which the
       employee is qualified, for at least a 6-month period during which the employee
       shall not be discharged without cause;

              (4) Any District employee that is displaced as a result of a contract, and is
       hired by the contractor which was awarded the contract which displaced the
       employee shall be entitled to the benefits provided by the Service Contract Act


              (5) If the employee's performance during the 6-month transluon
      employment period required by paragraph (3) of this section is satisfactory, the
      new contractor shall offer the employee continued employment under terms and
      conditions established by the new contractor;

              (6) Any solicitation for proposed contracts issued pursuant to this section
      shall include information concerning the procedure by which current District
      government employees may exercise the right to bid on the contracts;

            (7) An assessment of the economic impact on the District shall be
      completed for each contract proposed pursuant to this section;

              (8) Prior notification shall be provided to affected District government
                                                                                            [7463]



                                               -3-              JHARBO Limited, Inc. , CAB No. P-527


         employees 30 days prior to any adverse impact on the employees ....

The Lottery agrees that it has not complied with any of these requirements in connection with the
subject RFP. IHARBO does not challenge the fact of noncompliance.

                                          DISCUSSION

         We exercise jurisdiction over the protest pursuant to D.C. Code § 1-1189.3(a)(1) (Supp.
1997).

        A request for proposals may be cancelled only if the CPO determines in writing that "   the
action is taken in the best interest of the District government and there is a reasonable basis for
cancellation. D.C. Code § 1-1183.7 (1992) ; Singleton Electric Co., CAB No. P-411 , Nov. 15,
1994,42 D.C. Reg. 4888, 4893; Shannon & Luchs, CAB No. P-415, Sept. 21, 1994, 42 D.C.
Reg. 4851,4859 & n.12 ; McMillan Limited Partnership, CAB No. P-301, Oct. 22, 1992,40
D.C. Reg . 4647, 4654 n.6.

       JHARBO argues that the Lottery's Executive Director, as the contracting officer for this
procurement, not the CPO, is the only one authorized to cancel the solicitation. In a related
argument, the protester claims that the CPO had no authority to conduct a pre-execution review
of a proposed award pursuant to the RFP because the regulations authorizing his pre-execution
review were published after the RFP was issued. We do not agree with either argument.

         A contracting officer may recommend cancelling a solicitation, but the Procurement
Practices Act requires the CPO to approve any cancellation through the procedure provided in
D.C. Code § 1-1183.7. See Singleton Electric Co., 42 D.C. Reg. at 4894. In the present case,
the CPO himself initiated the cancellation action in his determination and fmdings that the
solicitation had to be cancelled. Under the Procurement Practices Act, the CPO has the authority
to cancel a solicitation, where the circumstances warrant cancellation, even if another contracting
officer issued the solicitation. The CPO's power to cancel is independent of any delegated
authority to conduct pre-execution contract reviews. In this case, the CPO properly followed the
requirements of D.C. Code § 1-1183.7. He made a written determination that cancellation was
in the best interest of the District government. His determination cancelling the RFP adequately
explains the reason for the cancellation - i.e., the RFP was cancelled because the Lottery had not
complied with the privatization requirements of D.C. Code § 1-1181.5b (Supp. 1997). The
Lottery concedes that it had not complied with the privatization requirements and the protester
does not challenge that fact. 1 Clearly, the CPO has stated a reasonable basis for cancell_i~g the



1 On more than one occasion, the Board advised JHARBO to respond to the issue of whether the

CPO was correct in concluding that the solicitation was subject to the privatization requirements
of D.C. Code § 1-1l81.5b. JHARBO has never addressed the issue in its submissions. On
                                                                                            =[7464]



                                               - 4-             JHARBO Limited, Inc., CAB No. P-527


RFP. Finally, the CPO forwarded his determination to the Inspector General for review within
72 hours of the action.

        As for the CPO's pre-execution review, JHARBO fails to appreciate the powers vested in
the CPO by the Procurement Reform Amendment Act of 1996 which amends the Procurement
Practices Act. The CPO's authority to conduct a pre-execution review does not depend on the
regulations issued by the CPO at 27 DCMR § 8030. 1, 44 D.C. Reg. 3520-21 (June 20, 1997).
By virtue of the statutory delegation of exclusive contracting authority to the CPO, and his
responsibility for procurements subject to the PP A, the CPO has the statutory authority to conduct
a pre-execution review -of any procurement covered by the PPA. See D.C. Code § 1-1181.5
(Supp. 1997). Thus, JHARBO's contention that the CPO's pre-execution review here was
improper and violated due process is without merit. The Lottery, in its Agency Report, points
out that in September 1997 the District of Columbia Financial Responsibility and Management
Assistance Authority ("Authority") expressly delegated to the CPO pre-execution review authority
for approving new contracts under $1 million. (AR at 2-3 n.2) . An express delegation of pre-
execution review authority by the Authority augments the CPO 's statutory authority. The
delegation harms no interest of the protester. The pre-execution review delegated to the CPO by
the Authority is meant to assist the Authority in fulfilling its financial and management assistance
responsibilities and to provide additional prOCedural safeguards that a procurement action is
proper. It deprives offerors of no substantive rights.

        Citing our decision in McMillan Limited Partnership , JHARBOalso argues that the
cancellation is legally insufficient because RFP Amendment No.2 which notified the offerors of
the cancellation does not set forth reasons for the cancellation. Unlike the situation in McMillan,
where the Director of the Department of Administrative Services never prepared a valid
determination supporting the cancellation action, here the CPO executed a cancellation
determination and the Lottery's subsequent cancellation notice to offerors simply notified offerors
of the cancellation without identifying the reasons or that the action was taken by the CPO.
Because the CPO's cancellation meets the requirements of D.C. Code § 1-1183.7 and the legal
standard of reasonableness, we discern no legal infirmity in the Lottery's notice to offerors.

       Accordingly, JHARBO's protest is denied.

DATE: January 16 1998
                                                      JIATHAN D. ZISC             U
                                                      A inistrative Judge



January 9, 1998, JHARBO ~ught reconsideration of the Board's December 23, 1997 order, which
denied its request for certain documents for which the Lottery has claimed a deliberative process
privilege. The Board previously reviewed the documents in camera. IHARBO's motion for
reconsideration is untimely. See Board Rule 313 .2.
                                                              [7465]



                             _5 -   JHARBO Limited, Inc., CAB No. P-527




CONCURRING:




~JfN~~
Chief Administrative Judge




Administrative Juage
