                                                                                                      [7506]



                       GOVERNMENT OF THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA
                             CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD

 PROTEST OF:

         M .C. DEAN, INC.                )
                                         )               CAB No. P-528
         Under IFB No. 98-0026-AA-4-0-CC )


       For the Protester: Joel S. Rubenstein, Esq., and Andrew N. Cook, Esq. , Bell, Boyd, & Lloyd .
For the Government: Warren Nash, Esq., and Howard Schwartz, Esq. , Assistants Corporation
Counsel, for the District of Columbia.

       Opinion by Administrative Judge Phyllis W, Jackson, with Administrative Judge Jonathan D .
Zischkau, concurring.


                                               OPINION

         M.C. Dean, Inc., ("M.C. Dean") has filed a protest based upon alleged improprieties in the
 above-referenced Invitation for Bids ("IFB"). M.e. Dean states that the invitation is improperly
 structured and does not allow for full, fair, or open competition because the solicitation may be read
 as providing for the application of preferences pursuant to the Equal Opportunity for Local, Small,
and Disadvantaged Business Enterprise Act ("LSDBE Act"), D.e. Code §1-1152 , ~ . (Supp .
 1997), on eight line items for which the IFB itself provides the prices, i. e., fixed pre-determined bid
costs, in addition to line items on the lFB's unit price schedule calling for bid prices. The District has
filed a motion to dismiss challenging M.e. Dean's standing to bring protest and, in the alternative,
an Agency Report contending that the LSDBE Act requires the District to apply a preference
percentage to the total bid price as set forth in the IFB, not just to the portion of the total price
representing the bidder's line item prices. We conclude that the Protester dOeS have standing and that
the protest should be sustained.

                                          BACKGROUND

       On November 10, 1997, DPW issued IFB No . 98-0026-AA-4-0-CC, in the open market for
the Annual Maintenance Contract for Electrical Controls Equipment at Various Water and Sewer
Authority Facilities for a base year and three option years. As amended, the IFB established a bid
opening date of December 17, 1997.

        The lFB's Unit Price Schedule required bidders to insert line item prices for an "Initial Period"
and three option years. The Schedule's "Initial Period" reads as follows :
                             •                                                                    (7508]



                                                   -3-              M. e. Dean, Inc., CAB No. P-528
 "ALL OF THE ABOVE (Initial Year, First Year, Second Year, Third Year Options) separately."
 It also stated that award would be made to one bidder "based on the total lowest price of the Initial
 period and Option Years." (Agency Report, ("AR"), Exhibit 1 ).

        Section 1.4 of the IFB , "Special Conditions", Paragraph T provides:

        T. "Open Market" Procurement Application of D.C Act 9-152 :

                (1)     Preferences for Local Businesses, Disadvantaged Businesses or Businesses
                        Operating in an Enterprise Zone:

                        A.       General Preferences

                                 Under the provisi"ons of D.C Act 9-152, "Equal Opportunity for
                                 Local, Small and Disadvantaged Business Enterprises Act of 1992"
                                 ("Act"), the District shall apply preferences in evaluating bids or
                                 proposals from businesses that are local, disadvantaged or located in
                                 an enterprise zone of the District of Columbia. .

                                 For evaluation purposes, the allowable preferences under the "Act"
                                 for this procurement are as follows :

                                 1)     Five percent reduction in bid price or the addition of the
                                        equivalent of five points on a 100-point scale for a local
                                        business enterprise ("LBE") certified by the Local Business
                                        Opportunity Commission ("LBOC").

                                        Any prime contractor that is a LBE certified by the LBOC
                                        will receive a five percent (5%) reduction in the bid price for
                                        a bid submitted by the LBE in response to an Invitation for
                                        Bids ("IFB") ....

        The total amount of the line items fixed by the agency in the solicitation is $810,000.
Therefore, if the 5% reduction is applied to the pre-determined line items, the recipient of the
preference would receive a price reduction of $40,500 in addition to the reduction on any line items
actually bid by the bidders.

         On December 16, 1997, one day before bid opening, M .C Dean filed its protest. On
December 17, 1997, DPW received bids from three bidders. The contract specialist added each
bidder's line item bid prices and the pre-determined line item prices for a total "bid price". The
contract specialist then applied a five percent reduction to Ideal's total price because Ideal was
certified as an LBE. (AR, Ex. No. 3). The evaluation results were as follows~:"""
                                                                                                         [7511J



                                                      -6-               MC Dean, Inc., CAB No . P-528

         806      CONTRACT AWARD PREFERENCES

         806.1 Agencies shall accord a preference in awarding procurements to LBEs and DBEs and
               certified joint ventures with participating LBEs and DBEs as follows :

                  (a)     An LBE qualifies for the equivalent of five points on a J00 point basis in the
                          case of proposals or five percent reduction in price for bids in the open
                          market;


         806.3 An agency shall reduce the bid price or increase the points on a proposal based upon
               the LBEs or DBEs percentage of the bid or proposal.

 27 DCMR §§ 806, 806.1 and 806.3.

         The contracting agency conducting the procurement is responsible for awarding the
preferences. Id § 1-1152.3(b). The contracting officer has not made any determinations on the issue
in this procurement, as far as the record presented to us indicates. A bid tabulation prepared by a
contract specialist applies the preference to the total of the line item prices bid by the bidders and the
DPW pre-determined line item amounts fixed in the !FB.

        We conclude that the LSDBE Act, the implementing regulations, and the PPA require that
preferences apply to the total prices actually bid by bidders. Since the pre-determined line item prices
are not "bid" by bidders, they cannot be considered a part of the "bid price" as that term is used in
27 DCMR § 806.3. Including non-bid line item prices (fixed by the agency) in the total bid price,
when applying the preference reduction, would effectively increase the percentage reduction rates
defined in the LSDBE Act 2 Our conclusion is consistent with GAO precedent. The GAO has
upheld the agency's limitation of the application of the small disadvantaged business evaluation
preference to portions of the contract which are actually priced by the offerors, and for which the
amount paid does not fluctuate. In such cases, the agency did not apply the percentage preference


          2Considering that the LSDBE Act provides a maximum percentage reduction of 12 percent (where
 an entity qualifies as an LBE (5%), DBE(5%), and enterprise zone entity (2%» , a solicitation containing
 large pre-determined line item prices would produce absurd evaluation results if the preference reduction
 were applied to bid and non-bid (pre-determined) line items. The Council could not have intended such an
 implementation of the LSDBE Act for PPA procurements. In the present case, if a five percent preference
were applied to fixed pre-determined costs of $810,000, or 25% of the total contract price, the effect would
be to provide a preference advantage in excess of the 5% statutory rate since non-preference bidders could
only adjust their prices over items actually bid, or 75% of the total contract price in order to be
competitive. Therefore, preferences should not be applied to pre-determined costs fixed by the agency.
Thus, the agency's pre-determined costs should also be excluded from the total bid priceiOr evaluation
purposes. Because the preference reduction is applied only to bidders ' actual bid prices, and not to pre-
determined or estimated line item costs inserted by the agency, the agency must have a reasonable basis for
inserting such pre-determined costs in a solicitation.
                                                                                                  [7512]



                                                 -7-              M.C Dean, Inc., CAB No . P-528

to index pricing or similar pricing for which the amount paid was subject to fluctuate. The court
determined that in such cases, the method employed by the agency constituted a reasonable
application of the preference called for under its regulations. Hudson Bay Natural Gas Corporation,
69 CompoGen. 188, B-237264, 90-1 CPD ~ 151, Feb. 5, 1990; see also Commercial Energies, Inc.,
B-237572, 90-1 CPD ~ 160, Feb. 7, 1990.

        We find that the most reasonable interpretation of the LSDBE Act, the regulations, and the
PPA is to apply preferences to the total prices actually bid by qualified LSDBE bidders and to exclude
any pre-determined costs of the agency from the total bid price for evaluation purposes. Therefore,
to the extent the agency intended to evaluate in a different manner, the protest is SUSTAINED.
Because Ideal remains the low bidder even when bid prices are properly evaluated, Ideal may receive
award if it is otherwise responsible.


DATE: April 16, 1998




CONCURRING:




J   ~fJr
    A1'HAND. ~IS KAU
Administrative Judge
