                 GOVERNMENT OF THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA
                       CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD
                              717 14lH STREET, N.W., SUITE 430
                                 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20005
                                       (202) 727-6S'J7 (Ofe #)
                                       (202) 727-3993 (Fax #)

                                              ***

                                      October 14, 1998




TO:          Mr. Bryan Chaison, Project Manager
             HR General Maintenance Corporation
             2021 Shannon Place, S.E.
             Washington, DC 20020

             H. Christopher Malone, Esquire
             Warren J. Nash, Esquire
             Howard S. Schwartz, Esquire
             Assistants Corporation Counsel
             Office of the Corporation Counsel
             441 4th Street, N.W., lOth Floor
             Washington, DC 20001


SUBJECT:     CAB No. P-545, HR General Maintenance Corporation

      Attached is a copy of the Board's Opinion denying protest.
                                                                                                       [7611J



                      GOVERNMENT OF THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA
                            CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD


PROTEST OF:

       HR GENERAL MAINTENANCE CORPORATION                            )
                                                                     )       CAB No. P-545
       Under IFB No . 98-0066-AA-2-0-CC                              )

       For the Protester: Mr. Bryan Chaisone, Project Manager. For the Government: Howard
S. Schwartz, Warren 1. Nash, and H. Christopher Malone, Assistants Corporation Counsel.

       Opinion by Administrative Judge Claudia Booker, with Chief Administrative Judge
Lorilyn E. Simkins and Administrative Judge Phyllis W. Jackson, concurring . .

                                            OPINION

        Bryan Chaisone, Project Manager for HR General Maintenance Corporation ("HR" or
"Protester"), protests the Department of Public Works' ("DPW") consideration of contract award
to any of the three bidders listed that submitted bids in response to the solicitation, IFB No . 98-
0066-AA-2-0-CC. The three bidders were: NAPA Development Corporation ("NAPA"), SJC
Company ("SJC"), and AEO Construction Company ("AEO"). The Protester contends that at
bid opening on April 30, 1998, the three bids should have been excluded from consideration for
contract award because of various irregularities in the bid documents and because NAPA's bid
price was unreasonably low. The District later rejected two of the bids and as a result the only
remaining issue is the challenge to SJC's bid.

       On the same day as bid opening the Protester filed a letter with Mr. Kevin Green,
Contracting Officer, DPW, protesting DPW's consideration for contract award to any of the three
bidders. On June 12, 1998, HR filed this protest with the Board.

                                         BACKGROUND

        On April 6, 1998, DPW issued lFB No. 98-0066-AA-2-0-CC, for the replacement of the
roof ofDPW's Traffic Services Division located at 137 G Street, N.W. Bid opening occurred on
April 30,1998, and five bids were received. At the time of bid opening the bids were ranked as
follows :

       1. NAPA                $80,204
       2.SJC                  $119,083
       3.AEO                  $139,950
       4.HR                   $147,440
       5. Selective           $185,000
                                                                                                                    [7612]


                                                          2                HR Gel/eral Mail/lel/al/ ce, CAB No. P-545




                 Following bid opening HR was awarded 12 bid preference points for its status as a local
         small business located in an enterprise zone under the Equal Opportunity for Local, Small,
         Disadvantaged Business Enterprise Temporary Act of 1998, D.C. Act 12-278, Jan. 27, 1998,
         thereby reducing its bid price by 12% (for bid evaluation purposes only). HR became the third
         lowest bidder with a weighted bid of$129,747.20. On May 19,1998, DPW found all five bids
         to be responsive.

                 On the same day as bid opening, HR submitted to the DPW Contracting Officer a letter
         which contained a header entitled "Subject: Service of Protest". The letter protested DPW's
         consideration of contract award to NAPA Development Corp., SJC Co., and AEO Construction
         Co. for the same reasons set out in the protest filed with this Board. The DPW Contracting
         Officer did not forward the protest letter to the Board. On June 10, 1998, the DPW Chief of the
'   ..   Office of Contract Administration sent HR a let~er notifying it that DPW was in receipt of HR's
         protest and that its protest should be filed with the Board. Further, the letter informed HR to
         "Please redirect your conespondence accordingly."

                On June 12, 1998, the Protester filed this protest with the Board asserting that three of the
         bids should have been excluded from consideration for contract award for the following reasons.
         The Protester began by asserting that NAP A Development Corporation's price was well below
         market price and, as such, the work calmot be performed properly to specifications and scope for
         the amount quoted . Next, according to the Protester, SJC Company's bid bond was not attested,
         AEO Construction Company' s bid bond was not attested by the secretary and did not
         acknowledge Addendum No. I, and NAPA Development Corporation's bid package did not
         include payments to subcontractors and suppliers.

                 On July 6, 1998, the District filed an Agency Report arguing that the various protest
         grounds should be denied or dismissed. The District asserted that HR filed its protest late with
         the Board. Next, it argued that the issue raised with regard to NAPA's bid is not ripe for review,
         and DPW was in the process of investigating whether NAPA can perfonn the work for its bid
         price which is less than DPW ' s estimate. Lastly; the District contended that the issue raised with
         regard to SJC's bid is without merit; and the issue raised with regard to AEO's bid is moot.

                  In mid-August DPW requested that each of the remaining four bidders execute a bid
         extension form . NAP A failed to submit the extension fom1 and, as a result, its bid was rejected
         from further consideration for contract award. DPW had not resolved the issue of NAPA's
         ability to perfonn the work for the bid price prior to requesting the bid extension.

                 On September 10, 1998, in response to a Board request for a report from DPW on the
         current status of the review of NAPA's bid price, the current ranking of the remaining bidders,
         and the status of contract award the District submitted a status report. The District notified the
         Board that NAPA's bid was rejected for failure to submit a bid extension fOlTI1, AEO's bid was
         rejected for nomesponsiveness, and SJC was determined to be the apparent low bidder. As a
                                                                                                            [7613J


                                                 3                 HR Gelleral Mailltellallce, CAB No . P-545




result, DPW has detennined HR to be the second lowest bidder. Next, DPW expressed its
intention to award the contract to SJC if and when the Board decides this protest in favor of the
District. The District did not comment on the status of Selective's bid.

    . The Board finds that it has jurisdiction to hear and decide this protest and denies the
protest on its merits.

                                            DECISION
I.     Jurisdiction

        The District argues that the protest is untimely and, therefore, the Board lacks jurisdiction
to hear and decide this case on the merits.

       Board Rule 302.2, 45 D.C. Reg. 1415 (March 13, 1998) provides:

       (a) A protest based upon alleged improprieties in a solicitation which are apparent
       prior to bid opening or the time set [or receipt of initial proposals shall be filed
       with the Board prior to bid opening or the time set for receipt of initial proposals.
       In procurements where proposals are requested, alleged improprieties which do
       not exist in the initial solicitation, but which are subsequently incorporated into
       this solicitation, must be protested not later than the next closing time for receipt
       of proposals following the incorporation.

       (b) Protests other than those covered in paragraph (a) shall be filed with the Board
       not later than ten C1 0) business days after the basis of the protest is known or
       should have been known, whichever is earlier.

         ]11 accordance with Board Rule 302.2(b), the Protester would have had 10 business days
from May 1, the day after bid opening, until May 14 in which to file a protest with the Board.
However, the effect of the Protester having submitted a protest letter with the DPW Contracting
Officer on April 30, 1998, (bid opening day), although misdirected, is the functional equivalent
of filing the protest with the Board, for the purpose of timeliness. As stated in Fort Myel'
COllstruction COIp., CAB No. P-452, July 23,1997,44 D.C. Reg. 6476, 6481:

       Based on the circumstances presented in the record, we conclude that Fort Myer's filing
       of its protest with the contracting officer was functionally equivalent to filing the protest
       with this Board and that we should not dismiss the protest as untimely .... When Fort
       Myer delivered its protest to the contracting officer, it certainly provided fair notice to the
       appellee, the District of Columbia, and to the agency through the person of the
       contracting officer. 44 D.C. Reg. at 6481
                                                                                                                  [7614J


                                                  4                 fiR Gel/eraf Mail/lel/al/ ce, CAB No. P-545




       When the DPW Contracting Officer received HR's misdirected protest he was required to
immediately forward it to the Board. Instead, DPW took no action with regard to the protest for
approximately six weeks, until June 10, when it informed HR to file its protest with the Board.
On June 12, 1998, HR filed a protest with the Board.

       The Board finds that this protest was timely filed as of April 30, 1998, and, therefore, the
Board has jurisdiction to hear and decide this protest on its merits.

II.    Merits

         With regard to the merits of the protest, the Protester has challenged the eligibility for
contract award of the bids submitted by the three other bidders (NAPA, sic and AEO) and
argues that the bids should have been excluded from consideration for contract award. However,
after the filing of this protest DPW rejected AEO's bid as nonresponsive and NAPA's bid for
failure to submit a bid extension form. Therefore, the only remaining bidder whose eligibility
for contract award was challenged in the protest is SIC, the current apparent low bidder.

        The Protester argues that SJC's bid is ineligible for contract award because its bid bond
was not attested. However, the District has correctly pointed out that, in keeping with the
Board's decision in Fort Myel', 6482, the bid bond is nevertheless valid upon the corporation and
the surety.

         A bid bond is a form of guarantee designed to protect the govenunent' s interest in the
event of default. If a bidder fails to honor its bid in any respect, the bid bond secures a surety's
liability for all reprocurement costs. When required by a solicitation a bid bond is a material part
of the bid which must be furnished at the time of bid submission. If a bidder submits a defective
bid bond, the bid itself is rendered defective and must be rejected as nonresponsive. The
determinative question as to the acceptability of a bid bond is whether the bond documents
establish that the bond is enforceable against the surety should the bidder fail to meet its
obligations. See Fort Myel', at 6482, citing Norair Engilleering CO/p., CAB No. P-302, Oct. 21,
1992, D.C. Reg. 4636; and Southem Marylalld Restoration, Inc., CAB No. P-241, Aug. 7, 1991,
D.C. Reg. 4268.

         SJC's bid contains a bid bond signed by SJC's vice president, properly identifying the
lFB to which it was applicable in the appropriate penal amount. The bond was signed by the
attorney-in-fact of the surety with the attestation signature. The bond included a power of
attorney from the surety for the individual who signed as attorney-in-fact and contained the
surety's corporate seal (A.R., Exh. 3). The fact that the bidder's corporate secretary failed to
attest to the certificate as that ofthe SJC corporation would not defeat the District's right to
coverage under the bond should SJC default on its bid. Accordingly, the failure to include the
attestation is a minor irregularity which the contracting officer in his discretions is free to waive.
See 27 DCMR 1535.
                                                                                                           [7615]


                                                 5                 HR General Maintenance, CAB No. P-545




       Therefore, the Board finds that the failure of SJC to attest its bid bond does not, as a
matter of law, disqualify its bid from consideration for contract award and, the protester's
challenge cannot be sustained. Accordingly, this protest is denied.



SO ORDERED.



Date: October 9, 1998

                                                      Administrative Judge




CONCURRING:




Chief Administrative Judge
