                           GOVERNMENT OF THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA
                            CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD

PROTEST OF:

PREFERRED TEMPORARY SERVICES, INC.                    )
                                                      )        CAB No. P-0695
Under RFQ No. POCR-2004-Q-0020                        )

        For the Protester: Barbara Posner, President, Preferred Temporary Services, Inc. For the
Government: Howard Schwartz, Esq., and Talia Cohen, Esq., Assistant Attorneys General,
District of Columbia.

       Opinion by Administrative Judge Warren J. Nash, with Chief Administrative Judge
Jonathan D. Zischkau and Administrative Judge Matthew S. Watson, concurring.

                                            OPINION
                                   (Lexis-Nexis Filing ID 4841443)

        Preferred Temporary Services, Inc. (“PTSI”) protested the award of a task order for
temporary staffing services under Request for Quotations (“RFQ”) POCR-2004-Q-0020. PTSI
asserts that (1) the District included the wrong wage rates in the RFQ, and (2) the District failed
to include evaluation factors in the RFQ necessary for determining the most qualified bidder or
offeror. In its Agency Report, the District responds that (1) the contracting officer made
telephone calls to the offerors to correct the wage rate mistake, and the final quotations of each
bidder were based on the revised wage rates, and (2) the District was required to purchase the
lowest priced services from the bidder or offeror already on the multiple award schedule. The
protester did not file comments on the District’s Agency Report. We deny the protest.


                                        BACKGROUND

        On July 13, 2004, the Office of Contracting and Procurement (“OCP”) issued RFQ No.
POCR-2004-Q-0020 to three vendors, including PTSI, listed on the District of Columbia Supply
Schedule for Temporary Support Services. Multiple award supply schedules incorporate Federal
Department of Labor wage rates and allow District agencies to issue task orders to vendors for
services set forth on the schedule. The schedule was established by the District after competition
conducted by OCP. The RFQ originally required immediate responses on the date of issue.
After receiving initial quotations, the contracting officer realized that the RFQ incorporated an
outdated wage rate. The contracting officer allowed the three vendors to resubmit quotes the
next day using the correct wage rates. All three offerors resubmitted quotes using the correct
wage rates. The contracting officer awarded the task order to Midtown Personnel, Inc.
(“Midtown”), the schedule contractor that had submitted the lowest priced offer. PTSI misfiled
its protest with the OCP commodity manager on July 19, 2004. The commodity manager should
have immediately forwarded the protest to the Board. However, the commodity manager did not
forward the protest to the Board until August 16, 2004. The Board considers the protest to be
timely filed because we deem it to have been filed with us on the date it was originally filed with
                                                    2 Preferred Temporary Services, Inc. CAB No. P-0695


the commodity manager. See Fort Myer Construction Corp., CAB No. P-0452, July 23, 1996,
44 D.C. Reg. 6476, 6479; Pro-Tech Builders, Inc., CAB No. P-0601, Dec. 14, 1999, 45 D.C.
Reg. 1415.

                                         DISCUSSION

        We exercise jurisdiction pursuant to D.C. Code § 2-309.03(a)(1). The protester asserts
that (1) the District included the wrong wage rates in the RFQ, and (2) the District failed to
include evaluation factors in the RFQ necessary for determining the most qualified offeror. In
answer to the first protest ground, the District responds that since all three offerors timely
submitted quotations that used the same correct wage rates, there was no prejudice to any bidder.
We agree. In answer to the second protest ground, the District responds that 27 DCMR § 2104.2
sets forth price as the only selection factor when the District orders products or services under a
schedule, such as the District of Columbia Supply Schedule. That section states:

       Except as provided in § 2104.3, when ordering from a multiple-award schedule,
       the contracting officer shall place orders with the schedule contractor offering the
       lowest delivered price available.

As the District correctly points out, an RFQ issued under an existing supply schedule requires the
contracting officer to make an award to the lowest priced bidder. The supply schedule did not
require the RFQ to contain criteria for a technical evaluation.

       Accordingly, the Board denies the protest.

       SO ORDERED.

DATE: December 27, 2004                       /s/ Warren J. Nash
                                             WARREN J. NASH
                                             Administrative Judge



CONCURRING:

/s/ Jonathan D. Zischkau
JONATHAN D. ZISCHKAU
Chief Administrative Judge

/s/ Matthew S. Watson
MATTHEW S. WATSON
Administrative Judge
