                     GOVERNMENT OF THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA
                           CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD



PROTEST OF:


       THL ASSOCIATES                                  )
                                                       )       CAB No. P-643
       Under IFB No. POHA-2001-B-005                   )


       For THL Associates: Raymond Fioravanti, Esq., Daniel B. Abrahams, Esq., Epstein, Becker &
Green, P.C. For the Government: Howard Schwartz, Esq., Warren J. Nash, Esq., Assistants
Corporation Counsel.

       Opinion by Administrative Judge Jonathan D. Zischkau, with Chief Administrative Judge
Lorilyn E. Simkins and Administrative Judge Matthew S. Watson, concurring.

                                              OPINION

        THL Associates (“THL”) protests the award of a contract to J&K Distributors, Inc. of
Washington, D.C. (“J&K”) for the preparation and delivery of hot and cold meals to institutional child
care centers. THL alleges that the solicitation failed to provide quantity and quality criteria for certain
adult meals which were added through solicitation amendments. We conclude that the solicitation as
amended made all meals, both those for children and adults, subject to the USDA meal criteria set forth
in 7 C.F.R. § 226.20. If THL was not clear on the meal requirements for adult meals, it should have
brought the matter to the attention of the contracting officer prior to bid opening, and if not satisfied
with the response, protested prior to bid opening. Because THL filed its protest long after bid opening,
we dismiss the protest as untimely.

                                          BACKGROUND

       On February 20, 2001, the Office of Contracting and Procurement (“OCP”) issued IFB No.
POHA-2001-B-005 in the small business set-aside market for the preparation and delivery of hot and
cold meals to institutional child care centers owned and operated by the Department of Parks and
Recreation. (Agency Report (“AR”) Ex. 1, Section C.2). The solicitation states that it is necessary to
have food catered to the child care centers because the facilities are not equipped to meet health and
safety standards for on-site food preparation. (AR, Ex. 1, Section C.2). Section C.1.1, entitled
“Applicable Documents,” specifies the regulation at 7 C.F.R. Part 226 for the “Child Care Food
Program and USDA, Required Meals Pattern.” Section C.3 provides in pertinent part:

       The contractor shall provide all labor, supplies, and equipment necessary to prepare and
       deliver and estimated 1,261 hot or cold meals and snacks daily to the Department of
       Parks and Recreation daycare and after care sites. The contractor shall perform the
       following general tasks to satisfy the requirements above:
                                                     -2-                     THL Associates, CAB No. P-643




               C.3.1 The contractor shall plan and develop menus and menu cycles
                     approved by the District for children between the ages of 2
                     through 18 years old in accordance with the Child Care Food
                     Program and the USDA, Required Meals Patterns, 7 CFR Part
                     226.

               C.3.2 The menus shall be planned per the USDA approved cycle and
                     developed in the format which incorporates the meal type, food
                     components, meal portions and meal patterns and variety for
                     children ages 2 through 18 years old according to the sample meal
                     menu herein (see Attachment J.9). The menu must change every
                     eleven (11) calendar days.

               ....

       The Department of Agriculture, in 7 C.F.R. § 226.20 (c), lists meal patterns consisting of food
components for children through age 12 and adult participants, covering breakfast, lunch, supper, and
snack. (AR, Ex. 2).

        The contracting officer issued three amendments to the solicitation. Amendment Nos. 2 and 3
are relevant. On March 21, 2001, the contracting officer issued Amendment No. 2 which added to the
Section C.3 preamble the following: “An additional 100 adult size hot meals shall be delivered to the
daycare sites.” The amendment also added to the definition of “Luncheon” in Section C.1.2.7, the
following: “To include additional meal portions for adults according to the USDA serving size.” (AR,
Ex. 1). Amendment No. 3, issued on March 22, 2001, replaced the solicitation’s pricing schedules so
that they included contract line items for the adult meals.

        Three bidders, THL Associates, J&K Distributor, Inc., and Hood Institutional Foods, Inc.,
submitted bids by the due date of April 2, 2001. (AR at 3; Ex. 3). J&K was the low bidder with a total
price for the base year and four option years of $6,434,481.72. THL’s total bid price was
$6,670,723.88. (AR, Exs. 3 and 4). The pricing summaries shows that THL’s price for adult meals
(ranging from $5.50 to $6.16 each) was more than twice that of J&K’s (ranging from $2.30 to $2.54
each), which in the aggregate made THL’s adult meal price more than $400,000 greater than J&K’s.
(AR, Ex. 3). J&K’s adult meal prices were generally only about five cents greater than the prices it bid
for the children’s menu whereas THL’s adult meal prices were about twice that of its children’s menu.

       On June 11, 2001, the contracting agency advised THL of its intent to award the contract to
J&K. On June 25, 2001, THL filed its protest, arguing that there was not a level playing field in that
the adult meal offered by J&K was of considerably lower quantity and quality than that which was
offered by THL. Alternatively, THL contends that the solicitation contained a latent ambiguity
concerning the requirements for the adult meal. On July 10, 2001, the District’s CPO issued a notice to
proceed with contract award to J&K notwithstanding pendency of the protest. The Board sustained that
determination over a challenge from THL.

       On July 16, 2001, the District filed its response to the protest, contending that the protest should
                                                     -3-                    THL Associates, CAB No. P-643


be either dismissed as untimely because the protest raises solicitation improprieties or denied on the
merits because the solicitation clearly defined the requirements for adult meals. In its comments on the
District’s Motion to Dismiss/Agency Report, THL argues that the adult meals bid by THL were
consistent with the meals it had been providing to the District under the predecessor contract. THL
concedes that J&K’s adult meals meet the minimum meal requirements set forth in 7 C.F.R. § 226.20.
Nevertheless, THL argues that the solicitation as amended did not incorporate the requirements of 7
C.F.R. § 226.20 for adult meals.

                                            DISCUSSION

       We exercise protest jurisdiction pursuant to D.C. Code § 1-1189.3(a)(1).

        Sections C.1.1 and C.3 of the original solicitation clearly incorporated the meal requirements set
forth in 7 C.F.R. § 226.20 for the meals that were being solicited. The additions to Sections C.1.2.7 and
C.3 cannot reasonably be read with the remaining portions of the original solicitation as excluding adult
meals from the only specified criteria for meals found in the solicitation, namely, 7 C.F.R. § 226.20. If
THL was not certain of the requirements for adult meals, it had an obligation to raise the issue before
the bid opening time. We see no latent ambiguity in the requirements for adult meals. See Grumman
Data Systems Corp. v. Dalton, 88 F.3d 990, 997-98 (Fed. Cir. 1996).

       THL’s protest is untimely because solicitation improprieties which are apparent prior to bid
opening must be protested prior to bid opening. D.C. Code § 1-1189.8(b)(1).

       SO ORDERED.


DATED: August 3, 2001                                        /s/
                                                       JONATHAN D. ZISCHKAU
                                                       Administrative Judge

CONCURRING:



       /s/
LORILYN E. SIMKINS
Chief Administrative Judge



      /s/
MATTHEW S. WATSON
Administrative Judge
