                     GOVERNMENT OF THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA
                           CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD


PROTEST OF:


       M.C. DEAN, INC.                                  )
                                                        )       CAB No. P-0654
       Under IFB No. 01-0157-AA-2-0-KA                  )


      For the Protester, M.C. Dean, Inc.: Fred A. Mendicino, Esq., Watt, Tieder, Hoffar & Fitzgerald,
LLP. For Fort Myer Construction Corp.: Christopher M. Kerns, Esq. For the Government: Howard
Schwartz, Esq., Assistant Corporation Counsel.

       Opinion by Administrative Judge Jonathan D. Zischkau, with Chief Administrative Judge
Lorilyn E. Simkins and Administrative Judge Matthew S. Watson, concurring.

                                             OPINION
                                        CourtLink Filing ID 829563

        M.C. Dean, Inc., protests the award of a contract to Fort Myer Construction Co., alleging that
Fort Myer failed to meet the solicitation requirement of having an electrical contractor’s license, that
the employee designated by Fort Myer in its bid as having the requisite certification for performing
certain traffic signal work will not actually be performing that work, and that Fort Myer’s bid is
unrealistically low. The contracting officer determined that Fort Myer recently received the proper
electrical contractor license, was a responsible contractor, and had the lowest responsive bid. Because
M.C. Dean has not demonstrated any violation of law, regulation, or the terms of the solicitation, we
deny the protest.

                                           BACKGROUND

        On March 15, 2002, the Department of Public Works (“DPW”) issued IFB No. 01-0157-AA-2-
0-KA for FY-02 City Wide Traffic Signal Bulb Replacement. (Agency Report (“AR”), Ex. 1). The IFB
sought a contractor to furnish all necessary labor, materials, and equipment necessary to replace all
incandescent vehicular and pedestrian signal heads with light emitting diode (“LED”) modules at all
signalized intersections and at all mid-block flashing signals or warning devices in the District. The
proposed contract was for one year, with an option to extend the contract for an additional year.

      Section A of the IFB required the prime contractor to be an electrical contractor licensed and
bonded in the District. IFB section 19 states:

       A minimum of one of the contractor’s employees must have demonstrated experience in
       the installation of traffic signal heads. This employee must be at least Level II IMSA
       Certified, and have experience working in and around the Type 170 microprocessor
       based solid state traffic signal controller. Proof of certification shall be a requirement for
       consideration as a responsive bidder. A copy of the employee’s Level II IMSA
       certification shall be submitted with the contractor’s bid. The contractor will be required
                                                -2-                          M.C. Dean, Inc., CAB No. P-0654



       to retain an employee with these minimum credentials during the entire contract. This is
       the only contractor employee who will be permitted access to the controller cabinet.

(AR Ex. 1, at 11).

        On April 17, 2002, DPW opened three bids. (AR Ex. 2). Fort Myer submitted the lowest priced
bid in the amount of $7,888,551, and had attached to its bid the Level II IMSA certificate of Mr.
Michael Holland. (AR Ex. 2, 3). M.C. Dean submitted the next lowest bid in the amount of $9,199,125,
and attached the Level II IMSA certificate of Mr. Jerome Thomas. (AR Exs. 2, 4).

       On May 1, 2002, M.C. Dean filed its protest with the Board. The District filed its Agency
Report on May 22, 2002, noting that DPW was still evaluating the bids and had not made a
determination concerning Fort Myer’s responsibility. For those reasons, the District was unable to
address the merits of M.C. Dean’s protest grounds.

        Fort Myer responded to the protest on May 31, 2002. Responding to M.C. Dean’s responsibility
challenge, Fort Myer states that it has been given final approval for its electrical contractor license.
Addressing M.C. Dean’s claim that the Fort Myer employee designated in its bid as the IMSA Level II
certified technician will not actually perform the work, Fort Myer states that it will provide the
appropriate Level II IMSA certified personnel for contract performance. Fort Myer argues that the
solicitation does not mandate that only the specific employee named in its bid can perform the
fieldwork under the contract. Addendum No. 2, issued April 2, 2002, contained answers to bidder
questions raised at and after the pre-bid conference, including the following question tendered by M.C.
Dean:

       Question:       Will you consider addressing the issue on whether or not the IMSA Level
                       II person has to be a current employee upon submission of the bid, or a
                       prospective employee upon award?

       Answer:         Yes. Page 11 and 12, Paragraph 3 of Special Provision 19 states that the
                       employee’s Level II IMSA certification shall be submitted with the
                       contractors bid. The employee named on the certificate must be on the
                       contractor’s payroll when the sealed bid is submitted. This is to affirm
                       the bid award is not compromised if employment of the certified
                       employee is not executed.

(Protest, Ex. 2, Addendum No. 2, at 10-11). Fort Myer contends that this provision makes clear that it
may have an employee other than the designated employee perform fieldwork so long as the employee
is properly certified. Regarding M.C. Dean’s argument that Fort Myer’s bid is unrealistically low, Fort
Myer states that it has confirmed that its bid is realistic and has shown the contracting officer how it
calculated its bid prices. Although it concedes that its bid for pay item 9 (retrofitting signal head
sections) is considerably lower than M.C. Dean’s bid for the same pay item, Fort Myer points out that
several other pay items in its bid were over twice as high as M.C. Dean’s. (Fort Myer Response, at 6-
7). Fort Myer also challenges the pricing estimates contained in the McIntosh affidavit (Protest, Ex. 4)
submitted by M.C. Dean, arguing that the affiant failed to properly estimate the time required to replace
a signal head section. (Fort Myer Response, at 5-6).
                                                -3-                          M.C. Dean, Inc., CAB No. P-0654



       On June 10, 2002, the District filed the contracting officer’s June 7, 2002 determination and
findings which states that Fort Myer’s bid was responsive and that Fort Myer was a responsible
contractor. The District’s determination and findings attached a copy of Fort Myer’s electrical
contractor license, dated May 29, 2002.

                                            DISCUSSION

       We exercise protest jurisdiction pursuant to D.C. Code § 2-309.03(a)(1).

        The Procurement Practices Act and the procurement regulations require that the District award
contracts only to responsible contractors. D.C. Code § 2-303.03(e); 27 DCMR § 2200. Generally,
licensing is a matter of responsibility, not responsiveness. Diversified Information Systems, Inc., CAB
No. P-0454, Sept. 4, 1996, 44 D.C. Reg. 6495, 6496; C&D Tree Service, Inc., CAB No. P-0440, Mar.
11, 1996, 44 D.C. Reg. 6426, 6434-6435. In the present case, the record contains a written
determination by the contracting officer that Fort Myer is a responsible contractor and possesses the
proper electrical contractor license required by the solicitation. We see no basis for disturbing the
responsibility determination.

        Regarding M.C. Dean’s second protest ground, that Fort Myer did not intend to use the Level II
IMSA certified employee designated in its bid for contract performance, we agree with Fort Myer that
the contract terms do not require it to use only that designated employee for work involving the traffic
signal controller. What the contract requires is that the contractor retain an employee with the Level II
IMSA credentials during the entire term of the contract and that at least one employee who is Level II
IMSA certified be present whenever access is required to a traffic signal controller cabinet. (AR Ex. 1).

        Finally, M.C. Dean claims that Fort Myer’s bid price is unrealistically low. The record does not
show that Fort Myer’s bid is below the cost of performance. Even if the evidence supported such a
finding, we have held that a bid price below the cost of performance is not objectionable for that reason
alone. C.P.F. Corp., CAB No. P-0521, Jan. 12, 1998, 45 D.C. Reg. 8697, 8700. Whether the contract
can be performed at a price below the cost of performance is a matter of bidder responsibility. We are
satisfied from the record that the contracting officer has considered bid pricing when it determined Fort
Myer to be responsible.

                                           CONCLUSION
       We have carefully considered each of M.C. Dean’s protest arguments. Having concluded that
M.C. Dean has not shown that the District violated law, regulation, or the terms of the solicitation in
evaluating Fort Myer’s responsibility and selecting it for award, we deny M.C. Dean’s protest.

       SO ORDERED.

DATED: July 30, 2002                                  /s/ Jonathan D. Zischkau
                                                      JONATHAN D. ZISCHKAU
                                                      Administrative Judge
                             -4-   M.C. Dean, Inc., CAB No. P-0654



CONCURRING:


/s/ Lorilyn E. Simkins
LORILYN E. SIMKINS
Chief Administrative Judge


/s/ Matthew S. Watson
MATTHEW S. WATSON
Administrative Judge
