                     GOVERNMENT OF THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA
                         CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD

PROTEST OF:

       Arrow Construction Co., LLC/                             )
       W.M. Schlosser Co., Inc., Joint Venture                  )
       1111 Good Hope Road, S.E.                                )
       Washington, D.C. 20020                                   )   CAB No. P-0692
                                                                )
       Under Solicitation No. GAGA-2004-1-0131                  )
       District of Columbia Public Schools                      )

       For the Protester: Michael J. Cohen, Esq. For District of Columbia Public
Schools: Erika L. Pierson, Esq., Attorney Advisor.

       Opinion by Administrative Judge Warren J. Nash with Chief Administrative
Judge Jonathan D. Zischkau and Administrative Judge Matthew Watson, concurring.

                                OPINION AND ORDER
                                Lexis-Nexis Filing ID 4337999

        Arrow Construction Co., LLC/W.M. Schlosser Co., Inc., Joint Venture
(“Arrow/Schlosser JV”) filed a protest on July 16, 2004, requesting that the District reject
the bid of Washington Sprinkler Co./Tompkins Builders Joint Venture
(“Washington/Tompkins JV”) for Solicitation No. GAGA-2004-1-0131, the
modernization of J.P. Sousa Middle School, and award the contract to the
Arrow/Schlosser JV. On August 18, 2004, the District of Columbia Public Schools
(“DCPS”) filed a “Dispositive Motion in Lieu of Answer” asserting that the protest failed
to state a claim. On the same date, DCPS attempted to file with the Board a request that
the Board allow DCPS to proceed with performance while the protest is pending. D.C.
Code § 2-309.08 (a)(c)(1) and (2) provide as follows:

           (c) (1) Within one business day of receipt of the protest, the Contract
       Appeals Board shall notify the contracting officer that the protest has been
       filed. Except as provided in this chapter, no contract may be awarded in
       any procurement after the contracting officer has received this notice and
       while the protest is pending. If an award has already been made but the
       contracting officer receives this notice within 11 business days after the
       date of award, the contracting officer shall immediately direct the awardee
       to cease performance under the contract and to suspend any related
       activities that may result in additional obligations being incurred by the
       District under that contract. Except as provided in this chapter,
       performance and related activities suspended pursuant to this section may
       not be resumed while the protest is pending.
                                             -2-           Arrow/Schlosser JV, CAB No. P-0692


             (2) Performance under a protested procurement may proceed, or
       award may be made, while a protest is pending only if the CPO makes a
       written determination, supported by substantial evidence, that urgent and
       compelling circumstances that significantly affect interests of the District
       will not permit waiting for the decision of the Board concerning the
       protest. A copy of the determination shall be provided within one business
       day of issuance to both the Board and the protester.
See also Board Rule 304, Automatic Stay, 49 D.C. Reg. 2115 (Mar. 8, 2002).

        The Board reviewed the DCPS request to proceed and noted that the request did
not appear to be supported by substantial evidence. The Contracting Officer, Glorious
Bazemore, had attached to the request her declaration asserting that DCPS should be
allowed to proceed with performance. However, the Board noted that there was no
evidence from any program official showing “urgent and compelling circumstances that
significantly affect interests of the District [that] will not permit waiting for the decision
of the Board concerning the protest.”

        The Board conducted a telephone conference call with the parties on August 20,
2004, to discuss the DCPS request to proceed with performance during the protest.
During the conference call, the Board noted that D.C. Code § 2-309.08 required the Chief
Procurement Officer (CPO) of the District of Columbia to make a written determination,
supported by substantial evidence, that urgent and compelling circumstances that
significantly affect interests of the District will not permit waiting for the decision of the
Board concerning the protest. The Board further noted that the DCPS Chief Procurement
Officer did not have the power to prepare the written determination set forth in D.C.
Code § 2-309.08. The Board also noted that the DCPS Contracting Officer may not be
the appropriate person to provide the “substantial evidence” upon which the District’s
CPO could base a determination to proceed with performance.

        By motion dated September 2, 2004, DCPS submitted to the Board its “Amended
Motion for Performance Under a Protested Procurement.” In that motion, DCPS asserts
that independent contracting authority granted to DCPS under D.C. Code § 2-301.04(d)
allows it to make its own determination that performance of a contract may proceed
notwithstanding a protest. Section 2-301.04 provides as follows:

           (a) Except as provided in § 2-303.20, this chapter shall apply to all
       departments, agencies, instrumentalities, and employees of the District
       government, including agencies which are subordinate to the Mayor,
       independent agencies, boards, and commissions, but excluding the
       Council of the District of Columbia, District of Columbia courts, the
       District of Columbia Financial Responsibility and Management Assistance
       Authority, and District of Columbia Advisory Neighborhood
       Commissions.
          (b) This chapter shall apply to any contract for procurement of goods
       and services, including construction and legal services, but shall not apply
                                            -3-          Arrow/Schlosser JV, CAB No. P-0692


       to a contract or agreement receiving or making grants-in-aid or for federal
       financial assistance.
           (c) The Council of the District of Columbia, the Corporation Counsel,
       Inspector General, Auditor, and Chief Financial Officer may contract for
       the services of accountants, lawyers, and other experts when they
       determine and state in writing that good reason exists why such services
       should be procured independently of the CPO. During a control year, as
       defined by § 47-393(4), the Office of the Chief Financial Officer of the
       District of Columbia shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter,
       and shall adopt, within 30 days of April 12, 1997, the procurement rules
       and regulations adopted by the District of Columbia Financial
       Responsibility and Management Assistance Authority. During years other
       than control years, the Office of the Chief Financial Officer shall be bound
       by the provisions contained in this chapter.
           (d) This chapter shall apply to the Board of Education, except that the
       Board of Education shall have the authority to solicit, award, and execute
       contracts independently of the Office of Contracting and Procurement and
       the Chief Procurement Officer.

        DCPS contends that D.C. Code § 2-302.04(d) essentially substitutes the Board of
Education for the District CPO for all statutory findings and determinations committed to
the District’s CPO. Under that reasoning, the Board of Education is authorized by the
PPA to make the determination under D.C. Code § 2-309.08(c)(2) to proceed with
performance under a protested procurement. Since the Board of Education has delegated
such determinations to the Superintendent of Schools, who in turn has delegated such
determinations to the Chief Procurement Officer for DCPS, DCPS argues that its CPO is
authorized to make the determination to proceed. We do not agree. Although § 2-
301.04(d) provides contracting authority to the Board of Education, it simply does not
provide the statutory override power of 2-309.08(c)(2) to anyone other than the District’s
CPO. It is significant that the Council, in enacting the Procurement Reform Amendment
Act that included the override power, did not provide the CPO authority to delegate the
override power to any other District official. Without a specific and express assignment
of that power to anyone other than the District’s CPO, we conclude that only the
District’s CPO has the override authority. If the Board of Education lacks such authority,
then the DCPS Chief Procurement Officer also lacks such authority.

        DCPS further argues that the CPO of the District is not in a position to render
findings and determinations regarding the urgency of the contract in question because he
is not involved with DCPS contracting and procurement. First, D.C. Code § 2-306.04(d)
does not negate the District CPO’s contracting authority, it merely provides independent
and concurrent contracting authority to the Board of Education. As a matter of intra-
District comity, the District’s CPO will generally respect the Board of Education’s
primary contracting authority for DCPS. Second, DCPS fails to note that the statute
requires the CPO to make his determination based upon substantial evidence. Under the
statutory scheme, the user agency (here, DCPS) provides the evidence to the CPO, and
the CPO, after reviewing that evidence, decides whether performance under the contract
                                             -4-           Arrow/Schlosser JV, CAB No. P-0692


should proceed. The statute requires the CPO to take whatever steps he deems
appropriate for making an informed determination based on a review of the evidence
presented by the user agency.

       Accordingly, for the reasons set forth above, the Board denies the DCPS motion
requesting performance under a protested procurement.

        By motion dated August 18, 2004, DCPS filed a “Dispositive Motion in Lieu of
Answer,” requesting that the Board dismiss the protest for “failure to state a claim.”
However, the DCPS motion does not set forth any reasons why the protest fails to state a
claim. In any event, after reviewing the protest, the Board finds that the protest sets forth
allegations regarding DCPS representative Mr. Eugene Slater and representations made
by Mr. Slater regarding award of the contract. The protest sets forth a claim, and DCPS
should respond to the claim. The Board notes that the protester’s request to review bid
documents that should have been revealed at a public bid opening is not unreasonable.
Accordingly, for the reasons set forth above, the Board denies the DCPS motion to
dismiss the protest for failure to state a claim. In accordance with Board Rule 306, DCPS
should file its Agency Report no later than October 18, 2004.

       SO ORDERED

October 6, 2004                               /s/ Warren J. Nash
                                              WARREN J. NASH
                                              Administrative Judge

CONCURRING:


/s/ Jonathan D. Zischkau
JONATHAN D. ZISCHKAU
Chief Administrative Judge



/s/ Matthew S. Watson
MATTHEW S. WATSON
Administrative Judge
