                         GOVERNMENT OF THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA
                            CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD

PROTEST OF:

FORNEY ENTERPRISES, INC.                             )
MANHATTAN CONSTRUCTION CO.                           )
JOINT VENTURE                                        )
                                                     )        CAB No. P-0689
Under Solicitation No. POAM-2003-B-0025-RS           )

                                   OPINION AND ORDER
                                   Lexis-Nexis Filing ID 4270909

       The Board held a telephone conference call on September 8, 2004, regarding the District
of Columbia Motion to Dismiss as Moot, filed August 20, 2004. Forney Enterprises,
Inc./Manhattan Construction Co. Joint Venture (“Forney”) filed its opposition to that motion on
August 30, 2004. In its motion, the District asserts that the contracting officer is no longer
considering awarding the contract to the proposed awardee, Capital Technology Services, Inc.
(“CTSI”), and that the protest is therefore moot. Forney argues that the protest is not moot
because the District has not awarded the contract to Forney, the only other offeror. Forney
argues that the Board should not dismiss the protest until the District awards the contract to
Forney.

       In support of its argument, the protester cites Washington Freightliner, Inc., CAB No. P-
0122, Feb. 1, 1989 (36 D.C. Reg. 4038). In Freightliner, this Board declined to dismiss a protest
in which the District had decided that the protester’s bid was nonresponsive. In that opinion, the
Board stated:

       The protest of Freightliner is not moot because Freightliner is asserting that its bid
       entitled it to be awarded the contract and, further, that the District erred in determining
       that its bid was nonresponsive. Roofers [Roofers Incorporated, 1.P.D. 48 (D.C. CAB
       1986)] is inapplicable here and in other cases in which a protester is seeking to have its
       rights established.

In the current protest, because the District has not yet determined that Forney submitted a
nonresponsive or ineligible bid, Forney cannot assert that the District has caused Forney any
harm.

       In its protest dated June 29, 2004, Forney did not request the District to award the
contract to the Forney joint venture. More importantly, Forney does not allege that the District
determined Forney to be a nonresponsive or nonresponsible bidder. Forney did assert, and the
contracting officer has subsequently determined, that CTSI was not eligible for award.
Therefore, the protester has received all of the relief that it requested.

        The Board conducted the telephone conference call of September 8, 2004, to determine
the status of the award. During that conference call, the contracting officer stated that the
                                              2          Forney/Manhattan Joint Venture, P-0689


District had not yet determined whether it would award the contract to Forney, but that the
District did not intend to award the contract to CTSI. This Board cannot order the District to
award the contract to Forney if the District has not yet completed the post-bid, pre-award process
set forth in the statute and regulations. Therefore, it is appropriate for this Board to dismiss this
protest. If Forney discovers new protest grounds after this dismissal, Forney may file the
appropriate protest within the statutory time limits.

SO ORDERED.

DATE: September 24, 2004                      _/s/ Warren J. Nash_____________
                                              WARREN J. NASH
                                              Administrative Judge


CONCURRING:

/s/ Jonathan D. Zischkau                              /s/ Matthew S. Watson
JONATHAN D. ZISCHKAU                                  MATTHEW S. WATSON
Chief Administrative Judge                            Administrative Judge



Electronic Service to:

Stephen W. Smith, Esq.
Katz & Stone, LLP
8230 Leesburg Pike
Suite 600
Vienna, VA 22182

Howard Schwartz, Esq.
Talia S. Cohen, Esq.
Assistants Attorney General, D.C.
441 Fourth Street, N.W., 6th Floor North
Washington, D.C. 20001
