                       GOVERNMENT OF THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA
                             CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD

PROTEST OF:

Maryland Construction, Inc.                                 )
                                                            )        CAB No. P-0650
Under Solicitation No. POAM 2001-C-0009-JH                  )


      For the Protester, Timothy P. Leahy, Esq., Byrd and Byrd, LLC. For the Government,
Howard Schwartz, Esq. and Warren J. Nash, Esq., Assistants Corporation Counsel.

       Opinion by Administrative Judge Matthew S. Watson, with Administrative Judge
Jonathan D. Zischkau, concurring.


                                                 OPINION
                                          Courtlink Filing ID 494272



        Protester, Maryland Construction, Inc. (“MCI”), has protested against award to the
apparent low bidder, Engineering Management Services, Inc. (“EMS”), alleging irregularities in
the EMS bid bond and in announcement of the EMS bid at opening. The District has moved to
dismiss the protest on the ground that MCI is not a certified small business and therefore lacks
standing to protest the award of a contract set aside for small businesses. We agree with the
District and dismissthe protest.

       It is undisputed that MCI is not “certified” as a small business by the Local Business
Opportunity Commission (“LBOC”).1 It is further undisputed that Box 6 in the upper right of
the first page of the solicitation designated the solicitation as “Set-Aside - Building
Construction.” (Protester’s Reply to Motion, at 1) But it is also undisputed that the solicitation
did not contain the standard clauses required in a set-aside solicitation which limit eligible
bidders to “certified” small businesses only. (District Response, 3, note 1).

        As a general rule, an entity which is not certified as a small business by the LBOC is not
eligible for award of a contract set-aside for small businesses and lacks standing to protest award.
See J&K Distributors, Inc. of Washington, D.C., CAB No. P-432, June 13, 1995, 42 D.C. Reg.
4986. It is undisputed that MCI was not certified as a small business when the bids were opened.
As opposed to J&K, where certification was specifically required, MCI contends that, since the
solicitation lacked specific language requiring that only certified small businesses were eligible
to bid, although it is not certified, it cannot be excluded. We disagree with MCI.



1
  The Board takes administrative notice of the Office of Local Business Development database of LSDBE certified
contractors accessible at http://www.olbd.dc.gov/services/certification/search.asp
                                                           2           Maryland Construction, Inc., CAB No. P-0650


       At best, the terms of the solicitation are ambiguous. The solicitation stated, as protester
acknowledges, that it was “set-aside.” The Council has clearly stated its intent that the “set-
aside” programs which it mandated shall be established “to assist contractors who are certified as
local business enterprises, disadvantaged business enterprises, or small business enterprises
(emphasis supplied)” D.C. Code § 2-217.03 (2001 ed.) An ambiguity must be resolved in
conformity with the intent of the legislation establishing the program so as to uphold the
lawfulness of the solicitation. 2

        If MCI believed that the solicitation, as written, differed from the statutory set-aside
program, an ambiguity or impropriety existed on the face of the solicitation when it was issued.
Pursuant to our rules, “[a] protest based upon alleged improprieties in a solicitation apparent
prior to bid opening . . . shall be filed with the Board prior to bid opening. . . . .” Rule 302.2(a).
A bidder who fails to seek clarification of an ambiguity on the face of a solicitation prior to bid
opening risks a contrary interpretation of the allegedly ambiguous provision and is precluded
from raising such issues to the Board after opening.

        Since the solicitation clearly stated that the contract was to be “set-aside,” the Board
determines that the term must be read in conformity with the statutory definition of set aside
procurements which restricts bidders on such procurements to firms certified by the LBOC.
Because Protester was not certified, it is not eligible for award and lacks standing to protest. The
protest is DISMISSED.3

SO ORDERED.



Dated: January 17, 2002                                          /s/Matthew S. Watson
                                                                 MATTHEW S. WATSON
                                                                 Administrative Judge

CONCURRING:



   /s /Jonathan D. Zisschkau
JONATHAN D. ZISCHKAU
Administrative Judge



2
  There is no question that it was the intent of the contracting agency to require certification. The advertisement of
the solicitation in the Washington Times clearly stated that “This project is set aside for “Certified Local Small and
Disadvantage Business Enterprises Certified in the Category of Building Construction.” (October 15, 2001)
3
  Forney Enterprises, Inc., a certified small business bidder on this solicitation has moved to intervene in this protest
asserting that EMS is not itself certified and not eligible for award. The Board has not determined whether the
apparent law bidder, EMS, is qualified for award. That determination must be first made by the contracting officer
and is not yet ripe for consideration.


                                                                                                                         2
