                     GOVERNMENT OF THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA
                           CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD



PROTESTS OF:

CLW/CDM JOINT VENTURE                                  )
                                                       ) CAB Nos. P-0696, P-0697, P-0698, P-0701
Under Solicitation No. DCAE-2004-R-0014                )            (Consolidated)

      For the Protester, CLW/CDM Joint Venture: Laura E. Jordan, Esq. For the District of Columbia
Government: Howard Schwartz, Esq. and Talia S. Cohen, Esq., Assistant Attorneys General.

      Opinion by Chief Administrative Judge Jonathan D. Zischkau, with Administrative Judge
Matthew S. Watson, concurring.

                                               OPINION
                                       LexisNexis Filing ID 5086815

        CLW/CDM Joint Venture (“CLW”) has filed four protests regarding the District’s Request for
Proposals (“RFP”) for third party claims administration for the District government Worker’s
Compensation Program. In summary, CLW argues that (1) the RFP violates numerous provisions of
procurement law and violates a court order entered in Elizabeth Lightfoot, et al. v. District of Columbia,
et al, Civil Action No. 01-1484(CKK) (D.D.C.); (2) the District’s decision not to exercise an option
with CLW to continue its performance under a prior contract for third party claims administration, and
the District’s issuance of a flawed RFP evinces a pattern of bad faith dealings with CLW; (3) statements
made by the Acting Director of the Office of Risk Management during a hearing before the City
Council concerning an interim procurement solution show that the procurement process violates the
law; and (4) the District violated law and regulation by disclosing CLW’s confidential proposal
information in a Superior Court pleading. We conclude that the District has mooted the challenges to
the terms of the RFP through two subsequently issued RFP amendments, and that the record falls well
short of showing bad faith by the District. Further, CLW has not demonstrated that the District violated
law or prejudiced CLW in disclosing certain past performance questionnaires which were part of
CLW’s proposal. Accordingly, we deny in part and dismiss in part the protest grounds raised in CLW’s
consolidated protests.

                                           BACKGROUND

        On August 30, 2004, the District of Columbia’s Office of Contracting and Procurement
(“OCP”), on behalf of the Office of Risk Management, issued RFP No. DCAE-2004-R-0014 for third
party claims administration and related services for the District government’s Self-Insured Worker’s
Compensation Program, which covers approximately 33,378 District employees. (Agency Report
(“AR”), Ex. 1).

        On September 13, 2004 CLW filed with the Board its first protest (CAB No. P-0696)
challenging the issuance and contents of the RFP. On September 24, 2004, OCP issued Amendment
No. 2, which made extensive changes to the RFP in response to the issues raised by CLW in protest P-
0696. (AR, Ex. 2). Amendment No. 2 extended the closing date of the RFP until October 7, 2004.
                                                    -2-                   CLW/CDM, CAB Nos. P-0696, et al.




        On September 27, 2004 CLW filed with the Board a second protest (CAB No. P-0697), alleging
that Mr. James J. Jacobs, Acting Director, Office of Risk Management (“ORM”), during testimony
presented to the City Council, spoke of an “interim solution” for the disability program procurement but
refused to provide details or to state whether CLW was included or excluded from the solution.
According to CLW, Jacobs’ testimony showed that the District was not conducting a transparent and
fair procurement process for awarding the worker’s compensation program contract.

          On October 5, 2004, CLW filed a third protest (CAB No. P-0698), alleging that the RFP had to
be further amended or cancelled in light of a September 24, 2004 order entered in Elizabeth Lightfoot,
et al. v. District of Columbia, et al. In that order, the court ruled that the District had violated the D.C.
Administrative Procedures Act and due process when it terminated, suspended, or modified claimants’
disability compensation without having in place published rules governing the process and providing
notice to the claimants. According to CLW, the court order renders it nearly impossible for offerors to
construct a realistic pricing structure or legally to comply with RFP sections that are predicated on the
District’s ability to terminate, suspend, or modify benefits.

        On October 6, 2004, the District notified the Board and the CLW that on October 4, 2004, the
Interim Chief Procurement Officer signed a Determination and Findings to Proceed with Award while a
Protest is Pending (“D&F”). By letter dated October 7, 2004, the contracting officer notified CLW that
the District did not intend to exercise an option to renew the contract with CLW for disability
compensation services. Also, on October 7, OCP issued RFP Amendment No. 3 to address the quantity
of claims and related price issues raised by CLW in CAB No. P-0698. Amendment No. 3 provides:

        Offerors shall identify the assumptions used regarding the quantity of claims per year
        used in determining its proposed fixed annual price. In addition, offerors shall state
        what effect on the price an increase or decrease in the amount of claims per year would
        have on the proposed price per year.

In addition, Amendment No. 3 extended the closing date to October 12, 2004. (AR, Ex. 2).

        On October 8, 2004, OCP awarded Aon Risk Services, Inc., a sole source contract, DCRK-
2005-C-0003, to provide on-site claims adjudication for disability compensation services on an interim
basis to allow for evaluation and award under the protested RFP, with performance to begin on October
21, 2004, and end on February 28, 2005. On October 12, 2004, OCP issued RFP Amendment No. 4,
which extended the closing time for proposal to October 12, 2004, at 2:00 p.m. (AR, Ex. 2). The
District received a number of offers.

        On October 14, 2004, the protester filed a motion challenging the October 4, 2004 D&F to
proceed. The Board denied the motion. Also, on October 14, CLW filed a complaint and emergency
petition for a temporary restraining order in D.C. Superior Court to enjoin the District from allowing
performance under the interim contract with Aon. (P-0701 AR, Ex. 1).

        On October 15, 2004, the District filed in Superior Court a memorandum opposing CLW’s
petition for a TRO. (P-0701 AR, Ex. 2). On October 18, 2004, the District filed in Superior Court a
praecipe containing an affidavit of Ms. Phyllis Dailey, in support of its opposition to CLW’s TRO
                                                   -3-                   CLW/CDM, CAB Nos. P-0696, et al.


petition. On October 19, 2004, the Superior Court issued a TRO, with October 29, 2004, as the date of
the hearing on the preliminary injunction. (P-0701 AR, Ex. 3). On October 29, 2004, the Superior
Court dismissed CLW’s request for a permanent injunction because CLW failed to file a bond.

        On October 25, 2004, the District filed its Agency Report for the pending three protests. On
November 2, 2004, the protester filed a fourth protest which was docketed as CAB No. P-0701. This
protest alleges that the District illegally disclosed, in Exhibit 11 of the October 18 praecipe filed in
Superior Court, confidential information from CLW’s RFP proposal. Exhibit 11 consisted of CLW’s
proposal cover sheet, the technical proposal’s table of contents, and two past performance
questionnaires and addenda prepared by federal agencies evaluating CLW’s performance under various
federal contracts. CLW requests that the Board restore the status quo by canceling the RFP, terminating
the interim award to Aon, restoring the recently expired contract with CLW, and awarding CLW its
protest costs. Alternately CLW requests that, if the RFP is reissued, CLW be awarded all possible
points in categories relating to the disclosed information. The Board consolidated this protest with the
other three.

       On November 10, 2004, CLW filed the following comments to Agency Report:

              Protester CLW/CDM Joint Venture (“CLW/CDM”) hereby submits its
       response to the Agency Report in Protest Nos. P-0696, P-0697, and P-0698 (“protests”)
       to RFP No. DCAE-2004-R-0014 (“RFP”), as amended. CLW/CDM notes that the
       Agency Report does not overcome the arguments of the protests. Accordingly, in light
       of the facts set forth in the protests, pursuant to Board Rule 307.3, CLW/CDM
       respectfully requests that the protests be decided on the existing record.

      The District, on November 26, 2004, filed a motion to dismiss and Agency Report for CAB No.
P-0701. On December 7, 2004, CLW filed its opposition.


                                                 DISCUSSION

       We exercise jurisdiction pursuant to D.C. Code § 2-309.03(a)(1).

       CAB No. P-0696

       In CAB No. P-0696, the parties have agreed that grounds I-III of the protest are no longer at
issue. We address the remaining issues seriatim.

        In ground IV of P-0696, CLW contends that RFP section H.7.3 creates a conflict of interest in
the event that the contractor became involved in “outside” litigation, that is, litigation not related to a
disability claim. CLW also argues that the section violates D.C. Code § 2-301.01(b)(7), which sets
forth one of the statutory purposes of the PPA, namely, “to insure the fair and equitable treatment of all
persons who deal with the procurement system of the District government.” We agree with the District
that the RFP cannot be read to create a potential conflict with “outside” litigation. Accordingly, we see
no violation of law or regulation based on a conflict of interest. Concerning the ground alleging a
violation of the PPA’s policy of fair and equitable treatment, CLW has failed to demonstrate how
                                                   -4-                   CLW/CDM, CAB Nos. P-0696, et al.


section H.7.3 violates D.C. Code § 2-301.01(b)(7). In sum, we deny protest ground IV.

        In ground V of P-0696, CLW contends that the Incentive - Disincentive scheme set forth in RFP
section B.3 violates D.C. Code § 2-304.01(4) in that it does not provide an “unambiguous statement of
the technical requirements and evaluation criteria necessary” to respond to the RFP. With regard to the
various alleged deficiencies in the solicitation, including ambiguities with the composite audit score
used for the incentive-disincentive scheme, the District has responded in the Agency Report that
portions of Amendment 2, including sections G, VV, and Attachment 2, and RFP Attachment J.10,
address the deficiencies raised by CLW. In its comments to the Agency Report, CLW has not rebutted
any of the facts provided by the District as to the effect of Amendment 2 mooting the challenges, and
thus those facts from the Agency Report are deemed conceded. See Board Rule 307.4. CLW further
contends that ORM lacks the staff, resources, and competence to audit the performance of the
contractor. Contract administration issues are not valid grounds for protest. CLW next contends that
the measure of performance standards in the contract is improperly subjective and discretionary on the
part of District officials. Having reviewed the standards, and the unrebutted facts set forth in the
Agency Report, we do not agree with CLW that the amended solicitation violates law or regulation.
Finally, CLW raises a number of challenges to various other specification sections. The District has
responded to these grounds in its Agency Report, with references to the changes made by Amendment
2. Those facts stand unrebutted. In sum, we deny in part and dismiss in part protest ground V.

         In grounds VI and VII of P-0696, CLW contends that the District issued the RFP and conducted
the procurement in bad faith, violating its duties of good faith required by D.C. Code § 2-301.03. First,
CLW points to OCP issuing the RFP after CLW had received a notice of intent to exercise an option on
its then existing contract with the District for the same services. CLW correctly observes that a notice
of intent to exercise an option does not bind the District to do so, but CLW argues that against the
backdrop of its satisfactory performance, the District’s issuance of the RFP “strongly implicates” D.C.
Code § 2-301.03. As the District correctly observes, the issuance of an RFP after transmitting to the
incumbent contractor a notice of intent to exercise an option, falls far short of evidence of bad faith
dealings. Next, CLW argues that “the RFP includes many attempts to cloak an effort to circumvent
D.C. Code § 2-325.01.” That section provides:

               The Mayor shall not enter into any new contract for goods or services the cost of
       which exceeds the cost of an existing contract for the same goods or services, when the
       current contractor is willing to continue to provide the goods or services at the price of
       the existing contract, as long as the contractor is providing satisfactory service; nor shall
       the Mayor extend any existing contract for any amount over the price agreed to in the
       existing contract. Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit the Mayor from
       putting a contract out for bid for a lower price.

CLW alleges that the District structured the RFP to hide the true (presumably, higher) costs of
performance under a new contract pursuant to the RFP to avoid having to extend the then existing
contract with CLW. CLW identifies aspects of performance required by the RFP that make
performance more expensive than that provided under CLW’s existing contract. Since the services
under CLW’s existing contract and the services provided under the RFP are different in a number of
significant ways, we do not see how section 2-325.01 applies here. Even if we were to find the section
applicable, CLW has not convinced us from the record that the District engaged in any form of bad faith
                                                  -5-                   CLW/CDM, CAB Nos. P-0696, et al.


conduct.

        CLW further contends that all of the protest issues taken together “strongly suggest bad faith in
the procurement process.” As discussed above, none of the issues raised by CLW evince bad faith on
the part of District contracting officials. We also conclude that when considering all of the issues
together, still there is no evidence of bad faith.

       Accordingly, we deny in part and dismiss in part the protest allegations raised in grounds IV
through VII of P-0696.

       CAB No. P-0697

       In CAB No. P-0697, CLW states the following:

               Protestor . . . CLW/CDM attended and testified at a September 17, 2004 hearing
       of the Government Operations Committee of the District of Columbia Council to
       determine whether Acting Director James J. Jacobs should be confirmed as director of
       the Office of Risk Management (“ORM”). During his testimony, Mr. Jacobs made
       certain statements that provide the basis for this Protest.

               Specifically, during his confirmation testimony, Committee Chairman Council
       Member Vincent Orange inquired of Mr. Jacobs regarding his plans for keeping the
       Disability Compensation Program (“DCP”) operational during the pendancy of the RFP.
       Mr. Jacobs had earlier testified about an “interim solution” which he sought to
       implement. Mr. Orange asked Mr. Jacobs of what his interim solution consisted. Mr.
       Jacobs declined to provide specifics. Mr. Orange then asked Mr. Jacobs whether his
       “interim solution” involved CLW/CDM. Mr. Jacobs persisted in his failure to respond,
       saying that, because CLW/CDM had protested the RFP, he did not want to provide
       further information about the interim solution.

              The matters revealed by Mr. Jacobs’ sworn testimony violate D.C. Code §§ 2-
       301.01(b) and 2-304.01(4). . . .

        CLW argues that Mr. Jacobs’ testimony shows that the procurement process is neither
transparent nor open as required by D.C. Code § 2-301.01(b). We conclude that CLW has not
articulated a valid protest ground. Jacobs’ failure to elaborate on the agency’s procurement plans at a
Council hearing does not rise to the level of a violation of the PPA. The record does not reveal any
violation of law or regulation in the manner that the RFP was issued to prospective offerors or in the
on-going evaluation of offers.

        CLW’s other argument, that Mr. Jacob’s testimony “reveals that there are technical
requirements and evaluation criteria being used in the evaluation of the RFP that are not being made
public,” which it says violates D.C. Code § 2-304.01(4), similarly is not well taken. Section M of the
RFP identifies the evaluation criteria being used in this procurement. CLW has presented no evidence
that the contracting officer has failed to follow those evaluation criteria in evaluating the offers
submitted pursuant to the RFP. The merits of the emergency interim award to one of the other offerors,
                                                  -6-                   CLW/CDM, CAB Nos. P-0696, et al.


Aon Risk Services, is not at issue because CLW has never protested that award action.

       Accordingly, we dismiss the protest grounds raised in P-0697.

       CAB No. P-0698

        In CAB P-0698, CLW alleges that the Lightfoot order of the United States District Court, dated
September 24, 2004, requires the District to further amend or cancel the RFP. In the order, the court
held inter alia that the District violated the DCAPA and due process when it terminated, suspended, or
modified claimants’ disability compensation without having in place published rules governing the
process and providing notice to the claimants. CLW states that this court order significantly affects a
number of provisions of the RFP, and requires that the RFP be revised to meet the program
requirements imposed by the court order. CLW also argues that the District must cancel the RFP and
continue the contract with CLW until the District corrects the deficiencies in the disability
compensation program. The District responds that the District always has the ability to address any
effects of the Lightfoot order by issuing addenda to the RFP or a change order during contract
administration.

        CLW claims that the Lightfoot order prohibiting the District from terminating, suspending, or
modifying any disability benefits, until valid regulations are promulgated, renders it practically
impossible for offerors to construct a realistic pricing structure or legally to comply with RFP sections
that are predicated on the District’s ability to terminate suspend or modify benefits. CLW identifies
numerous sections. It claims that the problem permeates the entire RFP.

        The District responds that RFP Addendum No. 3, section B, addresses the issue of pricing the
fixed price contract based on variations in the number of claims, by requiring that the offerors identify
the pricing assumptions and the effect on price if claims are decreased or increased during the year.
Amendment No. 3, section B, states:

       Section L.4.4 is added as follows:

       Offerors shall identify the assumptions used regarding the quantity of claims per year
       used in determining its proposed fixed annual price. In addition, offerors shall state
       what effect on the price an increase or decrease in the amount of claims per year would
       have on the proposed price per year.

       The District argues that Amendment No. 3 provides a reasonable and fair method of pricing the
contract in view of the Lightfoot order and addresses any other variance in the number of claims. In
addition, regarding the ability of a contractor to perform the contract requirements consistent with the
requirements of the Lightfoot order, the District responds that if the order prohibits the District or the
contractor from performing a particular requirement, then the requirement will not be performed or
enforced until such time as the District obtains a revised court order, a reversal of the court order, or
promulgates regulations resolving the court’s objections. Finally, the District notes that the RFP
provisions state the District’s reasonable minimum needs, subject to the dictates of the Lightfoot order.

       CLW has not rebutted the facts articulated by the District in the Agency Report with regard to
                                                  -7-                   CLW/CDM, CAB Nos. P-0696, et al.


the effect of Amendment No. 3 on the ability of offerors to formulate a valid offer to the amended RFP.
We are not convinced from the record that the Lightfoot order renders it impossible for an offeror to
submit a meaningful offer in response to the RFP. With regard to the provisions in the RFP which
CLW claims would be impossible or illegal to perform, it is not the Board’s role to enforce
programmatic requirements specified in a court order.

        CLW also repeats in P-0698 its earlier allegation that the District has violated the standards of
good faith and fair dealings as well as the fundamental policies set out in D.C. Code 2-301.01(b). For
the reasons discussed earlier, we deny these protest grounds.

       CAB No. P-0701

       CLW alleges that the District violated the law when it filed in D.C. Superior Court an affidavit
with exhibits containing confidential information from CLW’s proposal as part of the District’s
opposition to CLW’s TRO petition in that court. The pleading at issue, styled “Praecipe Noting Filing
Declaration of Phyllis Dailey in Support of the District of Columbia’s Opposition to Plaintiff’s
Temporary Restraining Order”, was filed in Superior Court on October 18, 2004. Ms. Dailey states in
paragraph 8 of her affidavit:

               I further note that CLW/CDM says it will have to close its doors and that,
       according to Paragraph 32 of Mr. Weaver’s declaration it will not be able to absorb the
       “hit.” My review of his proposal for the new RFP issued August 30, 2004, and recently
       received by this office indicates, however, that there are at least two existing contracts
       in the millions of dollars with the Federal Transit Administration and the U.S.
       Department of Transportation, National Highway Safety Administration. See Exhibit
       11, CLW/CDM On Site Technical Proposal, Solicitation 6FG-03-RAB-0002 Addendum
       to Past Performance Evaluation.

        The referenced Exhibit 11 consists of a cover sheet entitled “A Proposal in Response to
Solicitation # DCAE-2004-R-0014 for Third Party Claims Administration Services for the District’s
Self-Insured Worker’s Compensation Program by CLW/CDM, JV”, followed by a 2-page table of
contents for the technical proposal, followed by two past performance questionnaires and addenda
prepared by the Federal Transit Administration and the U.S. Department of Transportation’s National
Highway Transit Safety Administration evaluating CLW’s performance under certain federal contracts.
 The questionnaires are marked at the top of each page “Source Selection Sensitive Information” and
show the contract number, dollar value, period of performance, and a brief description of the type of
contract work. The questionnaires also identify numerical ratings for quality of product or service,
timeliness of performance, business relations, compliance with price estimates, customer satisfaction,
and overall performance.

       CLW claims that the District violated 27 DCMR § 1610.1 which provides:

       After receipt of proposals, the information contained in them and the number or identity
       of offerors shall not be made available to the public or to anyone in the District not
       required to have access to the information in the performance of his or her duties.
                                                   -8-                   CLW/CDM, CAB Nos. P-0696, et al.


CLW argues that by not filing the pleading under seal or pursuant to a protective order, the information
was “made available to the public.” Further, according to CLW, the filing violated section 1610.3
which prohibits releasing information to a prospective contractor that might “give the prospective
contractor an advantage over others.” Section 1610.3 provides:

       No District employee or agent shall furnish information to a prospective contractor if,
       alone or together with other information, it might give the prospective contractor an
       advantage over others. However, general information that is not prejudicial to others
       may be furnished upon request.

        The District argues the protest is untimely because CLW filed it on November 2, 2004, 11 days
after the October 18 date the pleading was filed in Superior Court. CLW counters that its counsel did
not receive the pleading until the TRO hearing on October 19. The District has not rebutted CLW’s
sworn statement that its counsel received the pleading on October 19, which would make the protest
timely. Accordingly, we decline to dismiss the protest on timeliness.

        The District argues on the merits that disclosure of the past performance questionnaires did not
violate law or regulation because none of the information was proprietary and CLW never attached a
protective legend to its proposal identifying the information as proprietary. In addition, the District
states that CLW waived any claim of confidentiality by failing to seek a protective order either in
Superior Court or before the Board. Finally, says the District, disclosure of the past performance data
(ratings were either outstanding or excellent in all categories) did not competitively harm CLW. CLW
responds that the information is confidential because it is not readily ascertainable by proper means and
confers economic value from its disclosure or use.

       D.C. Code § 2-303.17(d) states:

       The District Government Procurement Regulations shall provide that information which
       has been designated as confidential or proprietary by a business, and which has been
       submitted by that business as a part of its response to an invitation for bids, a request for
       proposals, or competitive sealed proposals, is to be treated by the Director, an employee
       of that office, or any other employee of the District in a confidential manner, and is to
       be disclosed only to District employees for use in the procurement process and is not to
       be disclosed to other persons or parties without the prior written consent of that
       business.

         We do not need to reach the question of whether the District disclosed proprietary information
because it is clear that the disclosure cannot prejudice CLW in this RFP competition. There is nothing
in the table of contents or past performance questionnaires that could provide an advantage to another
offeror or a disadvantage to CLW. In other words, the disclosure will have no effect on the District’s
evaluation and selection pursuant to the RFP. CLW also challenges the disclosure as a violation of the
District’s obligation of good faith and other policies specified in D.C. Code § 2-301.01. For the same
reasons discussed above, we deny these additional protest grounds.

                                            CONCLUSION
                                               -9-                  CLW/CDM, CAB Nos. P-0696, et al.


      Based on our review of the consolidated protest record in P-0696, P-0697, P-0698, and P-0701,
we deny in part and dismiss in part the protest grounds raised by CLW.

       SO ORDERED.


DATED: February 4, 2005                              /s/ Jonathan D. Zischkau
                                                     JONATHAN D. ZISCHKAU
                                                     Chief Administrative Judge


CONCURRING:



/s/ Matthew S. Watson
MATTHEW S. WATSON
Administrative Judge
