                     GOVERNMENT OF THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA
                           CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD


PROTEST OF:

HORIZONS THERAPEUTIC SERVICES, INC.                    )
                                                       )       CAB No. P-0663
Under Invitation No. GAGA-2003-B-001                   )

        For the Protester: Mr. Shawn King, Vice President, Horizons Therapeutic Services, Inc.,
pro se. For the District of Columbia Government: James A. Baxley, Esq., Deputy General Counsel,
District of Columbia Public Schools.

      Opinion by Chief Administrative Judge Jonathan D. Zischkau, with Administrative Judge
Matthew S. Watson, concurring.

                                             OPINION
                                      CourtLink Filing ID 1081036

        Horizons Therapeutic Services, Inc. (“HTS”) protested the District of Columbia Public
Schools’ award of a contract for drug and alcohol screening, physical examination, and medical
evaluation services for employees of the District of Columbia Public Schools (“DCPS”). HTS
alleges that the contracting officer “did not call a bid opening nor announce the date and time of the
bid opening, even though HTS’s representative was there to witness the bid opening . . . .” HTS
further states that it was the only responsive and responsible bidder. DCPS has moved to dismiss the
protest on the ground that HTS’s bid was submitted late and that its protest is also untimely. HTS
has not responded to the motion or rebutted the District’s statement of facts. Accordingly, based on
the uncontested motion of the District, the protest is dismissed.

                                         BACKGROUND

        On August 27, 2002, the DCPS Office of Contracts and Acquisitions issued IFB No. GAGA-
2003-B-001 for drug and alcohol screening, physical examination, and medical evaluation services
for DCPS employees. (DCPS’s Dispositive Motion in Lieu of Agency Report, filed October 29,
2002, Ex. A). The solicitation provided that bids would be accepted until 2:00 p.m. on September
25, 2002. (Id., Ex. A). The solicitation was also posted on the DCPS website and advertised in the
Washington Times. (Id., Ex. B). The Washington Times advertisement indicated that bids were due
by 2:00 p.m. on September 25, 2002, as stated in the solicitation. DCPS states that HTS failed to
submit a bid by the due date and time and that no representative was present at the time of bid
opening. HTS states that it received verbal notice of award of the contract to another bidder on
October 2, 2002. HTS filed its protest on October 9, 2002. Beyond claiming that the contracting
officer “did not call a bid opening nor announce the date and time of the bid opening, even though
HTS’s representative was there to witness the bid opening,” HTS states in its protest that it would
demonstrate “in forthcoming correspondence” that the selection and award were flawed. HTS filed
no additional documentation with the Board and has not responded to the District’s motion, despite
repeated requests from the Board.
                                                -2-           Horizons Therapeutic Services, CAB No. P-0663




                                          DISCUSSION

        When a protester fails to respond to a dispositive motion and fails to contradict the factual
allegations in the agency’s dispositive motion, the Board may treat the motion as conceded and
dismiss the protest. Board Rules 307.3 and 307.4. Because HTS has failed to respond to DCPS’s
dispositive motion, we treat the motion as conceded and dismiss the protest.

       SO ORDERED.

DATED: November 29, 2002                              /s/ Jonathan D. Zischkau
                                                      JONATHAN D. ZISCHKAU
                                                      Chief Administrative Judge

CONCURRING:


/s/ Matthew S. Watson
MATTHEW S. WATSON
Administrative Judge
