                        GOVERNMENT OF THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA
                              CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD


PROTEST OF:                                         )
                                                    )
        IIU Consulting Institute, Inc.              )        CAB No. P-0656
        Under IFB No. POHA-2002-B-0306              )


      For the Protester: IIU Consulting Institute, Inc., Frank Ukoh, President, pro se. For the
Government: Howard Schwartz, Esq. and Warren J. Nash, Esq., Assistants Corporation Counsel.

       Opinion by Administrative Judge Matthew S. Watson, with Chief Administrative Judge
Lorilyn E. Simkins and Administrative Judge Jonathan D. Zischkau, concurring.


                                                  OPINION
                                          (Courtlink Filing ID 775133)

        IIU Consulting Institute, Inc. ("IIU" or “protester”) was the higher of two bidders on an
open market solicitation for Landscaping Services for the Department of Parks and Recreation,
bids for which were opened on May 9, 2002. It is undisputed that the low bid submitted by
Holston Brothers, Inc., (“Holston”) did not include EEO material as required by Section I.8 or a
Tax Certification as required by Section K.2 of the solicitation, and was not signed in the Offer
section of the bid (Box 17) as required by Section L.11 of the solicitation. The bid also did not
include a resume of the designated chief horticulturist as required in Section L.17, or
certification of the horticulturist as required in Section C.5.1. (See Holston Bid, Agency Report
(“AR”) Ex. 3). The protest of IIU raises two issues for the Board's consideration: 1) whether the
contracting officer may accept the bid from a bidder which did not sign the bid, and 2) whether
Holston's bid was nonresponsive due to: the lack of a tax certification affidavit; the lack of EEO
material; and failure to submit a resume of the designated horticulturist with the bid. A
certification as a horticulturist was submitted after opening in place of the resume.1

       The District asserts that: 1) the contracting officer may accept the unsigned bid of
Holston since there is sufficient written evidence that Holston intended to be bound by its bid,
and 2) that the contracting officer may permit correction of the additional deficiencies as minor
informalities which are matters of responsibility, not responsiveness, permitted to be cured
before award. The Board agrees with the District and dismisses the protest.


1
   The protester also alleges in its Comments on Agency Report that ”the certificate accepted was issued in
Maryland and not the District of Columbia as required by the IFB.” The IFB only requires “a qualified part-time
certified Horticulturist.” In fact, there are no governmental certification programs for horticulturists. All such
certifications are made by private associations. The certification submitted is from the Maryland Nursurymen’s
Association. It does not appear that there is any certifying association in the District of Columbia.
                                                2         IIU Consulting Institute, Inc., CAB No. P-0656




                                         DISCUSSION

Unsigned Bid

        Section 1535 of the Procurement Regulations deals with “Minor Informalities or
Irregularities in Bids.” 27 DCMR §1535. Specifically sub§2(c) provides that an unsigned bid
may be accepted when:

       the bid is accompanied by other material with the bid that indicates the bidder's
       intention to be bound by the unsigned bid (such as the submission of a bid
       guarantee or a letter signed by the bidder, with the bid, referring to and clearly
       identifying the bid itself).

       Holston's bid package included: 1) the bid envelope containing the sealed bid, the
Representations and Certifications and Other Statements of Bidders (Section K), which were
signed by Scott Deosaran, and 2) a list of key personnel, including the name of Scott Deosaran
as Account Manager. Moreover, the bid envelope contained a label for the receipt of hand
delivered bids that was signed by Scott Deosaran. (Exhibit 4). The certifications, as well as the
bid receipt, identified the solicitation and signed by the representative of the bidder meet the
requirements of the procurement regulations to allow acceptance of the bid without a signature in
the proper box. The language of the District regulation is identical to the language of the
corresponding Federal Acquisition Regulations. 48 CFR §14.405. The General Accounting
Office and the Board interpret the language similarly. See Wilton Corporation, 64 Comp. Gen.
233 (1985), 85-1 CPD ¶128.

Lack of other specific items

       We agree with the District that the lack of a tax certification affidavit, EEO material, and
resume of the horticulturist were also minor informalities which could be corrected after bid
opening in accordance with 27 DCMR §1535.3 which states:

       When the bidder fails to provide timely certifications or information with respect
       to Equal Opportunity and Affirmative Action Programs or other IFB
       requirements, the contracting officer may allow additional time for the submission
       to be made prior to award.

Each of the bid deficiencies falls within the ambit of the regulation. Further, we find that
attaching a certification from a recognized trade association is substantial compliance with the
resume requirement and was reasonably accepted by the contracting officer. With specific
reference to the resume requirement, this matter is distinguishable from Trifax Corporation,
CAB No. P-624, Mar. 20, 2001, 49 D.C. Reg. 3346, cited by Protester. In Trifax, the bidder
“concede[d] that it never intended to designate the employees to be provided under the contract,
                                                           3           IIU Consulting Institute, Inc., CAB No. P-0656


but only the “names of some of our [employees]” at p. 7, while in the instant case the bidder
committed itself to utilize the named horticulturist.2

       For these reasons, the Board finds that it was in the discretion of the contracting officer to
find each of the oversights in the bid were “minor informalities” and permit their cure after bid
opening and prior to award.

June 28, 2002                                                    /s/ Matthew S. Watson
                                                                MATTHEW S. WATSON
                                                                Administrative Judge

CONCURRING:



     /s/ Lorilyn E. Simkins
LORILYN E. SIMKINS
Chief Administrative Judge


  /s/ Jonathan D. Zischkau
JONATHAN D. ZISCHKAU
Administrative Judge




                                                          NOTE

        Although the Board will not interfere with the award in this matter, the Board believes that
the District should impress on contractors the need to carefully and fully prepare their bids. While
one can find, as we have, that each separate impropriety is, by itself, minor, there is some question as
to whether the contracting officer should have considered the numerous deficiencies, in total, to show
a lack of responsibility. Certainly the bidder did not prepare the bid carefully. The expectation on
the part of bidders of such cavalier treatment of bidder conformity with requirements may indicate
why only two bids were received on this procurement. If there was such a lack of care by the
successful bidder in meeting the formal bid requirements, there may have also been a lack of care in
analyzing and understanding of substantive solicitation requirements and computing the bid price.


2
   The Board again notes that, as stated in the Trifax decision, the clause is not appropriate for formally advertised
(IFB) solicitations.
                                                 4         IIU Consulting Institute, Inc., CAB No. P-0656


Although a lower price may be paid, it does not benefit the District in the long run to award contracts
to bidders who have an erroneous understanding of the nature or difficulty of the work to be done.

        We also note that bidders often ignore District of Columbia licensing requirements. In this
matter, Holston submitted Maryland, rather than District of Columbia, licenses. Although this may
be sufficient for bidding purposes, since there is reciprocity between the District and Maryland, 27
DCMR §2310, there is no indication in the Agency Report that District licenses were obtained before
award. Notwithstanding the availability of reciprocity permitting the District to issue a District
license on the basis of a Maryland license, a contractor is subject to a $500 per day fine if it fails to
obtain issuance of a District of Columbia license, even if it possesses a valid Maryland license.
Department of Health v. Williams Pest Control, DOH Office of Adjudication and Hearings, Case
No.: I-00-20085 (June 6, 2001).

        We believe that contracting agencies must demand attention to bid requirements and have an
obligation to zealously enforce regulatory requirements of other District agencies, in particular, to
insure that District licensing requirements are timely complied with.
