                        GOVERNMENT OF THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA
                         CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD

PROTEST OF:
                                                      )
       C&F Construction Company                       )         CAB No. P-0676
                                                      )
       Under Solicitation No. POKA-2002-B-0081-JBW    )


      For the Appellant: Robert Klimek, Esq., Klimek Kolodney & Casale PC. For the
Government: Howard Schwartz, Esq., and Warren J. Nash, Esq., Assistants Corporation
Counsel.

       Opinion by Administrative Judge Matthew S. Watson with Chief Administrative
Judge Jonathan D. Zischkau, concurring.

                                        OPINION
                                (Courtlink Filing ID 2347562)

        C&F Construction Company (“C&F”) has protested against the refusal by the
District to consider its bid on the above-mentioned solicitation based on a suspension and
possible debarment determined by the Chief Procurement Officer (“CPO”) dated June 27,
2003. (Agency Report (“AR”) Ex. 3). C&F contends that the CPO’s action is an
unlawful extension of an expired voluntarily debarment that C&F agreed to with the
United States Department of Transportation, or, in the alternative, is an unlawful
extension of a de facto debarment by the District. The District contends that Federal and
District debarment authority is totally independent, that the CPO’s suspension and
proposed debarment action taken June 27, 2003, was fully authorized and the contracting
officer’s refusal to consider C&F’s bid was proper. The Board agrees with the District
that the suspension was proper. Because the suspension was lawful, we see no error in
the contracting officer’s refusal to consider C&F’s low bid. The Board therefore denies
the protest. The Board notes, however, that although it does not agree with the protester
that the CPO’s action was an improper extension of a de facto debarment, the record does
show a de facto suspension by the District from at least as early as November 28, 2000,
that was confirmed by a letter dated December 18, 2002. (Reply to Agency Report, Ex.
5). In considering a debarment at this time, the CPO must consider the length of the de
facto suspension, 27 DCMR §2213.4, as well as the length of the effective debarment by
the U.S. Department of Transportation.

                                     DISCUSSION

        The Chief Procurement Officer is granted authority to suspend or debar a
contractor from doing business with the District by the District’s Procurement Practices
Act, D.C. Code § 2-308.04, which is separate and independent of the authority of the
Federal Highway Administration to debar a contractor from any federally funded
contracts. 29 CFR, Subpart C. It is axiomatic that the CPO, when he is acting within the
authority of District law, is not limited by determinations made by Federal officials, just
as the CPO’s action cannot limit the action of a Federal official.
                                            -2 -       C&F Construction Co., CAB No. P-0676




       Section 2-308.04 of the D. C. Code provides:

               (a)(3)(A) The CPO shall suspend a person or business from consideration for
               award of contracts or subcontracts for . . .

                                          * * *

               (b)(1) Conviction for commission of a criminal offense incident to
               obtaining or attempting to obtain a public or private contract, or
               subcontract, or in the performance of the contract or subcontract;

        It is undisputed that on December 7, 2001, the president of C&F and C&F entered
pleas of guilty to one count of unlawful supplementation of the salary of a government
employee in violation of 18 U.S.C. §§ 209(a), 216(a)(1) and payment of a gratuity in
violation of 18 U.S.C. 201(c), respectively, arising out of performance of District of
Columbia contracts. (Reply, 4). Based on the conviction, the CPO had discretion to
suspend C&F as early as December 2001.

        The CPO has not yet taken action to debar C&F and thus the propriety of a
debarment is not before the Board. There appears to be support in the record that prior to
the guilty plea there was a de facto suspension of the Protester by the District. A de facto
suspension occurs where a firm is excluded from contracting because a contracting
agency makes repeated determinations of nonresponsibility, or even a single
determination of nonresponsibility as part of a long-term disqualification attempt, without
following the procedures for suspension or debarment. See Government Contract
Advisory Services, Inc., 94-1 Comp. Gen. 181. Beginning in November 2000, the District
refused to do business with C&F without a formal suspension proceeding. (Reply, Ex.
1). In December 2002, the Water and Sewer Authority formally notified C&F of the
suspension. (Reply, Ex. 5). C&F has not received contracts from the District during the
period of its federal suspension and voluntary debarment. Although debarments may be
for a maximum of 3 years, it is clear that any action taken now by the CPO based on the
2001 conviction must recognize the suspension or debarment time previously imposed
for the same conduct in determining the debarment period, if any. (27 DCMR § 2213.4).
In determining C&F’s current fitness as a contractor, the contracting officer must also
consider C&F’s agreement to continuing review of contract performance by an
independent reviewer approved by the federal Department of Transportation. (Reply, Ex.
2, ¶ 2.3).

       SO ORDERED.

August 28, 2003                                            /s/ Matthew S. Watson
                                                     MATTHEW S. WATSON
                                                     Administrative Judge
CONCURRING:

       /s/ Jonathan D. Zischkau
JONATHAN D. ZISCHKAU
Chief Administrative Judge
