                           •                                                 •
                                       GOVElU"MENT OF THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA

                                 CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD
                                          71714"" STREET, N.W., SUITE 430
                                             WASHINGTON,D.C.20005


                                                      ***                        TELEPHONE   (202) 727-6597
                                                                                 FACSIMILE   (202) 727-3993


                                                January 8, 2001



TO:   Ralph O. Turner, President & CEO
      Trifax Corporation
      4121 Minnesota Avenue, N.E.
      Washington, DC 20019

      Marc D. Loud, Esquire
      Loud & Loud Law Office
      7826 Eastern Avenue, N.W., Suite 311
      Washington, DC 20012

      Frank Ukoh, President
      IIU Consulting Institute, Inc.
      703 Edgewood Street, N .E.
      Washington, DC 20017

      Warren J. Nash, Esquire
      Chris Malone, Esquire
      Howard S. Schwartz, Esquire
      Assistants Corporation Counsel
      441 Fourth Street, N.W., 10th Flooor
      Washington, DC 20001


             SUBJECT:        CAB No. P-624 (Protest Of: Trifax Corporation)

      Attached is a copy of the Board's Opinion sustaining protest.




                                                                                         438
                           GOVERNMENT OF THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA
                                  CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD
                                                                       •                                     [8086]




PROTEST OF:

        TRlFAX CORPORATION                               )
                                                         )       CAB No. P-624
        Under IFB No. HCOC 157329                        )


        For the Protester: Ralph O. Turner, President and CEO,pro se, and Mark D. Loud, Esq. For
the Intervenor, IIU Consulting Institute, Inc., Frank Ukoh, President,pro se. For the Government:
Howard Schwartz, Esq. and H. Chris Malone, Esq., Assistants Corporation Counsel.

       Opinion by Administrative Judge Matthew S. Watson, with Administrative Judges Jonathan
D. Zischkau and Phyllis Jackson, concurring.


                                               OPINION

         Trifax Corporation ("Protester" or "Trifax") protested against the award of a contract for the
services of two Pediatric Registered Nurses to IIU Consulting Institute, Inc. ("IIU") pursuant to IFB
No. HCOC157329, alleging that the District (1) failed to timely notify unsuccessful bidders,
including protester, of the award to IIU; (2) improperly accepted a bid in an amount which failed to
cover minimum compensation and benefit requirements; (3) failed to disclose the lowest cost only
criteria for selecting the awardee; (4) failed to follow the stated cost analysis criteria; and (5) failed
to publicly open the bids at the time, date, and place designated in the IFB. The District filed a
Motion to Dismiss ("Motion") alleging that the protester lacked standing and that the protest was
untimely, or, in the alternative an Agency Report ("AR"). The District now concedes that its
argument for lack of standing is without foundation and that the protester has standing to bring this
protest. We conclude that protest claims 1 and 5 are untimely, while claims 2,3 and 4, are timely.

        Upon consideration of the Agency Report, and further responsive pleadings, we find that the
proper criteria for bid evaluation were stated and used. Thus, claims 3 and 4 of the protest are
denied. As to Claim 2 concerning responsiveness, however, the we find that the bid submitted by
the IIU was not responsive and that award to IIU was therefore invalid. The protest is sustained and
the District is directed to cancel the contract with IIU as void ab initio.




                                                                                                       439
                                                     ~-----~--




                                                   -2-
                                                                      • Tn/ax CorporatIOn, CAB No. P-624
                                                                                                             [8087]




                                          BACKGROUND

        On April 4, 2000, the Contracting Officer, Office of Contracting and Procurement (OCP),
for the Department of Health (DOH) issued IFB No. HCOC 157329 ("IFB") soliciting bids to
provide "two professional Registered Nurses to conduct home visiting service to children ". enrolled
in the Birth to Eight (0-8) Project." (AR, Ex. 1, § C.l). The contract is an indefinite delivery,
indefinite quantity contract with payment based on a fixed unit price for each hour of service. (Jd.
§§ B & C.I).

       On May 5, 2000, the Contracting Officer issued Amendments 1 and 2. Amendment 1
extended the bid closing date to May 12,2000. CAR, Ex. 2). Amendment 2 responded to questions
posed by prospective bidders. CAR, Ex. 3).

        On May 12,2000, the Contracting Officer received bids from, among others, Trifax, IIU,
Motir Services, Inc. (Motir) and Horton & Barber CH & B). CAR, Ex. 4). The bids were opened
publicly at the time, date and place designated in the IFB. (AR, Ex. 5).

        H & B submitted the lowest bid. (AR, Ex. 6). On May 24, 2000, the Contracting Officer
requested that H & B provide certain information to determine H & B's responsibility. (AR, Ex. 7).
On May 25,2000, H&B responded in part to the Contracting Officer's request, providing only a list
of contracts previously held and did not respond to other items of the request. (AR, Ex. 8). The
Contracting Officer rejected the bid of H & B stating that: (a) H & B failed to submit all of the
information requested to determine responsibility, (b) H & B failed to submit the Tax Certification
with its bid, and (c) H & B failed to acknowledge Amendment 1 which extended the date for
submission of bids. (AR, Ex. 9).

       IIU submitted the next low bid. (AR, Ex. 4). On May 31, 2000, the Contracting Officer
requested that IIU provide certain information to determine its responsibility. (AR, Ex. 10). IIU
provided the information on June 6, 2000. (AR, Ex. 11)

        The Contracting Officer determined that: (a) the award of the contract to lIU for these
services was in the best interest of the District, (b) the prices bid by IIU were fair and reasonable, (c)
IIU is responsible, and (d) the failure by IIU to submit cost and pricing data was waived as a minor
informality. (AR, Ex. 9). On June 29, 2000, the Contracting Officer awarded the contract to IIU.
(AR, Ex. 12). At award, the Contracting Officer reduced the maximum number of hours for the base
year in the IIU bid from 1386 hours to 1236 hours and the total base year price from $74,566.80 to
$66,496.80. (AR, Ex. 12).

       The Bid Tabulation prepared by the Contracting Officer showed Motir as the next apparent
low bidder behind IIU. (AR, Ex. 6). Trifax was shown as the 4th low bidder. (Jd.).

      Due to administrative error, notice of award to IIU was not given to unsuccessful bidders
immediately after award. (AR, Ex. 16). On July 26, 2000, Trifax notified the Contracting Officer




                                                                                                      440
                                                 -3-
                                                                    • Trz(ax Corporation, CAB No. P-624
                                                                                                          [8088]




that it had learned that another bidder had been awarded the contract and requested a debriefing.
(AR, Ex. 13). After receiving no response, on August 11,2000, Trifax submitted a second request
for debriefing. (AR, Ex. 14).

        On August 11, 2000, the Contracting Officer notified Trifax and the other unsuccessful
bidders of the award to lIU. (AR, Ex. 15). On August 17,2000, the Contracting Officer notified
Trifax that the debriefing it requested was scheduled for August 22, 2000. (AR, Ex. 17).' The
debriefing was held on August 22. On August 30, 2000, Trifax filed this protest with the Board.


                                           DISCUSSION

                                         Motion to Dismiss

         On September 20, 2000, the District filed a Motion to Dismiss the protest on two bases.
First, that Trifax lacks standing to protest because another bidder, Motir, had submitted a bid which,
while higher than the successful bid, was lower than Trifax's bid, placing Motir, not Trifax, in line
for award if the protest were successful. The Board has consistently held that an unsuccessful bidder
not in line for award is not an aggrieved party and thus lacks standing to bring a protest. Secondly,
the District contends that the protest was not timely. Protester submitted a Response to the District's
Motion to Dismiss ("Response"). The District submitted a Reply to the Response ("District Reply").
lIU, as an Intervenor, submitted a pleading captioned "Motion to Dismiss" which was in the nature
of a reply to the Response and has been considered as such by the Board.

Standing

        Trifax did not protest against award to Motir. In general, the Board will find a lack of
standing if the protester does not protest against the award to another bidder, whose bid, while higher
than the successful bid, is lower than the protester's bid. See Barcode Technologies, Inc., CAB No.
P-524, Feb. 11, 1998, 45 D.C. Reg. 8723. However, as part of the Agency Report submitted
together with its Motion to Dismiss, the District submitted the Bid Abstract Form prepared at the bid
opening by Sonja White, Program Specialist, listing the contents of each bid. (AR, Ex. 4). The Bid
Abstract states that Motir's bid, as submitted, did not contain "pricing for option year 3 or 4."
Failure to submit a bid on each option makes the Motir bid nonresponsive on its face. (AR, Ex. 1
(Contract §M.2.3)) The bid abstract's note that pricing for option years 3 and 4 was not submitted
by Motir is not consistent with the Bid Tabulation, (AR, Ex. 6), which showed prices allegedly bid
by Motir for option years 3 and 4. Upon review of the procurement documentation, the Board
requested an explanation of the clearly contradictory record. The District, upon investigation, stated
that the bid prices shown in the Bid Tabulation are erroneous and were the result of a clerical error.
The District admits that Motir's bid was not responsive and therefore not in line for award. (District
Reply, at 15-16).
                                                  -4-
                                                                      •Trifax Corporation, CAB No. P-624
                                                                                                            [8089]




        Notwithstanding that Trifax did not assert in its protest that the bid submitted by Motir was
nonresponsive, the District is estopped from raising Motir's lower bid in opposition to Trifax's
standing if evidence or knowledge in the District's possession unequivocally shows that Motir's bid
was not responsive, and thus not properly in line for award. By submission of a pleading to the
Board, a party certifies that, to the best ofthe party's knowledge, information and belief, formed after
inquiry reasonable under the circumstances, the allegations have evidentiary support and that the
defenses or other legal claims are warranted. See Sup. Ct. Rules ofCiv. Proc. Rule 11 (b). "The
Board does not believe that the allegation as to standing in the Motion to Dismiss was intentionally
erroneous or otherwise wrongfully made, however, once it is known that the record unequivocally
shows that District procurement personnel, namely the procurement specialist, had actual knowledge
of facts contradicting the pleading, the pleading must be withdrawn regardless of whether it is
challenged by the protester. It is incumbent on the Board, sua sponte, to raise an issue oflaw when
unequivocal facts which would have precluded filing of the pleading became apparent. The Board
has treated that part of the District's Motion to Dismiss raising the standing issue as withdrawn.

Timeliness

Claims 1 and 5

        The Procurement Practices Act provides that protests, other than as to the terms of the
solicitation, "shall be filed no later than ten (10) business days after the basis of protest is known or
should have been known." D.C. Code § 1-ll89.8(b)(2). With regard to the first claim of the protest
that the contracting officer failed to timely notifY unsuccessful bidders, including protester Trifax,
of the award to nu, Trifax was aware of the delayed notification no later than August 15, 2000,
when it received the written notice of award to nu. (Protest at 1). With regard to the fifth claim of
the protest, that the contracting officer failed to publicly open the bids at the time, date, and place
designated in the IFB, Trifax should have been aware of any such issue on the date the bids were
opened, May 12,2000. (AR, Ex. 6).

        The subject protest was filed with the Board on August 30, 2000, clearly several months after
the bid opening, May 12,2000, and 11 business days after August 15,2000, when Trifax received
formal notice of the contract award. Consequently these protest issues are untimely.

Claims 2, 3 and 4

        With regard, however, to claims 2, 3 and 4 of the protest, that the Contracting Officer
improperly accepted a bid in an amount which failed to cover minimum compensation and benefit
requirements (claim 2), failed to disclose the lowest cost only criteria for selecting   <-
                                                                                          ~
                                                                                             the awardee
(claim 3) and failed to follow the stated cost analysis criteria (claim 4), there is no wafthat Protester
could have known the bases for its protest until after the debriefing by the contracting officer which
did not occur until August 22, 2000. (AR, Ex. 17).




                                                                                              442
                                                     -5-
                                                                          • Trifax CorporatIOn, CAB No. P-624
                                                                                                                   [8090]




        Anyone hearing a reading of the bids at bid opening would have heard the IIU bid read at the
prices and maximum hours originally submitted by lIU totaling $375,619, including option periods.
That bid price would not have indicated that the bid failed to cover minimum compensation.
However, during the award process, the maximum number of hours was reduced for IIU, but not for
any other bidder. It was not until the debriefing on August 22, 2000, that Trifax could have learned
the actual contract award for a total price of $367,549, including option periods, based on the
reduced number of hours. The District, however, at that time failed to advise Trifax that the
reduction in price resulted from a reduction in the maximum number of hours in the contract signed
with IIU. Indeed, even in the Agency Report to the Board, the District failed to note the reduction
in hours in comparing bids received. Both the Bid Tabulation CAR, Ex. 6), and the Motion at page
4 show the lower price for the IIU bid without any indication that the hours used to compute the lIU
bid total were fewer than the hours used to compute the total price for comparison purposes of each
of the other 7 bids. Notwithstanding the change in hours, the ranking ofthe bidders did not change,
although the lower price in the contract awarded to IIU made it appear, if one was unaware of the
reduced hours, that IIU had not committed itself to comply with the wages set in the wage
determination and was thus nonresponsive. Trifax had no way of knowing, even when it submitted
its protest, that the number of hours had been reduced causing it to believe that less than the
minimum wage determination would be paid. 1

        Similarly, Trifax could have had no way of knowing the basis of bid evaluation until the
debriefing took place. Since the protest was filed 8 days after the debriefing, claims 3 and 4 are
timely.

        The Motion to Dismiss the protest as untimely is granted as to claims 1 and 5 and denied as
to claims 2, 3 and 4.

                                        Merits of Claims 2. 3 and 4

Claims 3 and 4

         The protester alleges that the Contracting Officer failed to disclose the lowest cost only
criteria for selecting the awardee, claim 3, and failed to follow the stated cost analysis criteria, claim
4. The instant solicitation was conducted by competitive sealed bidding through an Invitation for



         1 It does not appear from the record that even counsel for the District could have known of the
reduction in hours in making the award to lIU. The Finding (AR, Ex. 9) prepared by the Contracting Officer
two days before the District filed its Motion to Dismiss referred to the lower price computed on the basis of
the reduced number of hours as "the lowest price submitted by a responsive and responsible bidder." In fact,
that price was never submitted by lIU or any other bidder. A subsequent Finding by the Contracting Officer,
(District Reply, Ex. 2), not signed until November 2, 2000, over a month after the protest was filed, finally
acknowledged that the number of hours had been reduced on the day of award "because the Department of
Health advised the Contracting Officer that there were insufficient funds, only $66,520, avai lable for the base
year."( ~2 p. 6)


                                                                                                         443
                                                   -6-
                                                                      • Trifax CorporatIOn, CAB No. P-624
                                                                                                             [8091]




Bids. By definition, the only evaluation criteria for a responsive bid to an invitation for bids is price,
either lowest line item price or lowest evaluated price. Section M.3 of the IFB (AR, Ex. 1) makes
this clear providing, in part:

        Evaluation for Award

        The contract will be awarded to the lowest responsive responsible bidder by line item
        or in total whose bid is most advantageous to the District, based on the total price of
        for the Base Year and Option Years.

(See also §M.2.1)

       The record indicates that, as to the evaluation of bids, the Contracting Office explicitly
followed the evaluation prescribed in the solicitation. Claims 3 and 4 of the protest must therefore
be denied.

Claim 2

         The pro se protest questioned the determination by the Contracting Officer that IIU was
responsible and that its bid was responsive, alleging that the award price indicated that the contractor
was not intending to be bound by the minimum wage determination included as a requirement of the
contract. (AR, Ex. 1 (Standard Contract Provisions §30(c)(I))). The protester's basis for its
allegation was that, based on the maximum number of hours of service which could be called for by
the District, IIU's total bid price did not indicate that IIU could cover the required minimum wage
costs.

        In response to Protester's allegation, the Agency Report showed that IIU was, in fact,
committed to pay the required minimum wages and demonstrated that, as a result of the
unannounced reduction in the maximum number of nursing hours to be procured, the award price
was fully consistent with adherence to the wage determination. 2 The allegations of the protest were
reasonably made because of the reduction in maximum number of hours was unknown to the
Protester or any other bidder and not immediately apparent in the procurement record.

        Protest claims must be read broadly, See Mine Safety Appliances Company, B-242379, Nov.
27, 1991, particularly when the procurement record has not clearly set forth the actions of the
contracting officer. Maintenance of the integrity of the procurement system requires that, when any
issue of responsibility or responsiveness have been raised in a protest, particularly in a protest filed
pro se, the Board consider all issues relating to responsiveness which are immediately apparent in




       2 The Board has serious concerns as to the appearance of impropriety raised by amending the
procurement terms for one bidder without offering the same amended terms to other bidders. However,
because the ranking of bids was not changed by the amendment, the error, if any, was harmless.



                                                                                                         444
                                                   -7-
                                                                       • Tn/ax CorporatIOn, CAB No. P-624
                                                                                                              [8092]




the record, regardless of whether or not the protester has explicitly raised the specific aspect of
responsiveness.

        The solicitation provided, among other requirements:

        SECTION J - LIST OF ATTACHMENTS

        J.4             Tax Certification Affidavit



                                                  ***
        L.1S            KEY PERSONNEL

        L.lS.l          The offeror shall set forth in its Bid on an attached sheet in Section
                        III the names and reporting relationships of the key personnel whom
                        the offeror will use to perform the work under the proposed contract.
                        Their resumes shall be included in an attached folder and turned in
                        with their Bid. Their resume will state the total number of hours each
                        will devote to the contract.

        L.lS.2          The personnel specified in the contract are considered to be essential
                        to the work being performed hereunder. Prior to diverting any of the
                        specified key personnel for any reason, the Contractor shall notify the
                        Contracting Officer at least thirty (30) calendar days in advance and
                        shall submit justification (including proposed substitutions) in
                        sufficient detail to permit evaluation of the impact on the contract.
                        The offeror shall not reassign these key personnel or appoint
                        replacements without written permission from the Contracting
                        Officer.

       The Agency Report plainly documented that IIU's bid, as received, did not meet either of
these requirements.    The bid abstract noted concerning IIU's bid that "no resumes [were]
submitted." (AR, Ex. 6). Upon review of the original IIU bid attached as Exhibit 12 to the Agency
Report, the Board observed, in addition, that, although lIU submitted two tax certifications, one
dated May 12 and the other dated June 22,2000, neither was fully completed. 3 (AR, Ex. 12).



        3 There is no indication as to why two differently dated certifications were included with the bid.
Nevertheless, both forms left blank lIU's Unemployment Insurance Account Number and both forms failed
to indicate whether Employer Withholding, Corporation Franchise, Personal Property or the Arena/Public
Safety fees were either "Current" or "Not Current." On October 5,2000, during the course this proceeding,
nu supplied its Unemployment Insurance Account Number and indicated that it was obligated to pay and
was in fact current for each of the taxes. (nU Letter dated October 5, 2000, attached as Attachment 3 to



                                                                                                               445
                                                     -8-
                                                                         • Trifax Corporation, CAB No. P-624
                                                                                                                 [8093]




          The fact that the information was required by the IFB is not dispositive of the question of
responsiveness. "[M]erely stating that a requirement is a responsive matter will not suffice to make
it so. In all cases, the rationale underlying the responsiveness characterization must establish a
"material" term to the invitation for bids." Forrester Constructors, Inc., CAB 1987, 1 P.D. 74, 83
(note 6).

        In order for the District to accept a bid, the bid must be responsive. It is a long established
principle of formal advertising that the responsiveness of a bid is determined on the basis of that bid
as submitted, and not on the basis of information provided after opening. Id. at 78-79. If the failure
oflIU to submit the required information with its bid rendered the bid nonresponsive, the award to
IIU was improper.

Tax Certification

        While the District admits that the tax certifications submitted by IIU were incomplete, citing
our holding in J & R Roofing Co., Inc., the District correctly asserts that "submitting the tax
certification affidavit is a matter of responsibility, not responsiveness." CAB No. P-548, March 22,
1999,46 D.C. Reg. 3691, 3698. The position of the District ignores the second part of the holding
that matters of responsibility may be resolved "up to the time of award." (Id. at 3698). The record
shows that the tax certification was not completed by IIU prior to award. 4 It was not until the issue
was raised in this proceeding that IIU provided complete the tax compliance information. (Response,
Ex. 3).

       The contracting officer is charged with responsibility to possess or obtain information
concerning responsibility that is current at the time the determination of responsibility is made. The
procurement regulations provide:

               Before making a determination of responsibility, the contracting officer shall
        possess or obtain information sufficient to satisfy the contracting officer that a
        prospective contractor currently meets the applicable standards and requirements for
        responsibility set forth in this chapter.

27 DCMR § 2204.1.

       At the time the award was made the Contracting Officer had no basis to conclude that IIU
was in compliance with its District tax obligations. The two tax certification documents in the



District letter of the same date).

        4 The District also asserts that, in any event, "[a] tax certification affidavit is not required for a
contract that is less than $100,000," (Response 13), citing 27 DCMR 2204.6. Although the certification may
not have been required, when a certification actually submitted casts doubt on compliance by the bidder, the
contracting officer has an obligation to inquire further. (See 27 DCMR 2204.8).



                                                                                                           446· ,
                                                    -9-
                                                                        • Trifax CorporatIOn, CAB No. P-624
                                                                                                                [8094]




possession of the Contracting Officer were plainly incomplete. The Board recognizes that the
determination of a prospective contractor's responsibility is the duty of the contracting officer and
that that official is vested with "wide latitude to exercise business judgment." Kidd Int 'I Home Care
Services, Inc., CAB No. P-547, Sept. 15, 1998,45 D.C. Reg. 8835, 8839. Therefore, in reviewing
a determination concerning general standards of responsibility, we will not overturn a finding of
responsibility or nonresponsibility unless the determination lacks any reasonable basis." Ideal Elec.
Supply Corp., CAB No. P-372, Aug. 13, 1993,41 D.C. Reg. 3603. In this matter, the Contracting
Officer had no basis when he made the award to determine whether the contractor was in compliance
with District tax laws. In such a circumstance, the Board will review an unsupported determination
of responsibility.

       During the course of this proceeding, IIU presented evidence that it was actually in
compliance with items it had left blank on the tax certificate. (Response, Ex. 3). We therefore
conclude that, although unsupported in the contract record at the time of award, the determination
oflIU's responsibility by the Contracting Officer was not incorrect.


Key Personnel

       It is undisputed that IIU did not submit the resumes of key employees with its bid as required
by the solicitation. The Bid Tabulation prepared at bid opening specifically noted "no resumes
submitted." (AR, Ex 4). Although it was considered significant enough to note the absence of
resumes at the time of bid opening in the Bid Abstract which normally identifies only questions of
responsiveness, the District contends that "a resume is a matter of responsibility that may be
submitted up to the time of award." (Response, 14).

         This matter presents difficulties in interpretation because the District has included in a
formally advertized solicitation (lFB) a provision dealing with key employees of a type normally
included in a negotiated solicitation (RFP)5. (See e.g., "Key Personnel" clause to be in inserted in
"all solicitations and resultant cost-reimbursement contracts" contained in 48 CFR 352.270-5). The
specific provision included in this solicitation not only requires the submission of resumes, but
makes the named individuals a required term of the contract unless substitution is agreed to by the
contracting officer. We believe that the solicitation, as written, makes the resumes a matter of
responsiveness. Responsiveness concerns whether a bidder has unequivocally offered to provide
supplies or services in conformity with the material terms and conditions of the solicitation;
responsibility refers to the bidder's apparent ability and capacity to perform all of the contract
requirements. See Skyline Credit Corporation, B-209193, March 15, 1983,83-1 CPD 257.




        5 Indeed, the clause uses the term "offeror" which normally refers to a respondent to a soiic;,tation
for a negotiated procurement, as opposed to the term "bidder" which normally refers to a respondent to a
formally advertised solicitation.



                                                                                                         447
                                                  -10-
                                                                      •Trifax CorporatIOn, CAB No. P-624
                                                                                                            [8095]




       The District cites two opinions of the Comptroller General, Owl Resources Company, B-
210084, Apr. 29 1983,. and Science Applications, Inc., B-193479, Mar. 8,1979, which hold that
requirements to submit resumes are matters of responsibility and not responsiveness. These
decisions are distinguishable from the instant case. In each ofthe cited cases, the solicitation merely
required the submission of resumes, but did not contain any specific requirement that the named
individuals be utilized in performance. The Comptroller General has expressed greater importance
of submission of resumes when the named individuals will be mandated for performance.               <




              Offeror "bait and switch" practices, whereby an offeror's proposal is favorably
       evaluated on the basis of personnel that it does not expect to use during contract
       performance, have an adverse effect on the integrity of the competitive procurement
       system and provide a basis for rejection of that offerors' proposal. ... This does not
       mean that substitution of employees after award is prohibited; such substitution is
       unobjectionable where the offeror acted reasonably and in good faith. (Citations
       omitted).

Hornet Joint Venture, B-258430, Feb. 22, 1995.

        Rather than merely showing the availability of qualified personnel, which would be an aspect
of responsibility, the solicitation makes employment of the named individuals a material contract
term. In addition, the solicitation emphasizes the importance the District attached to naming the key
employees by requiring, not only that they be listed and their resumes supplied, but also that each
"resume will state the total number of hours each will devote to the contract." Although in the
context of negotiated procurements, the Controller General has clearly indicated that where
employment of named individuals is required by the contract terms, failure to name those individuals
and show that they are committed to employment before award renders a proposal nonresponsive
and the proposer ineligible for award. Essex Corporation, B-246536, June 25, 1992, presented
a situation similar to the instant matter. "[I]n its final revised proposal, [the awardee had] advised
[the contracting agency] that it would wait until after its proposal had been evaluated, and after it had
been awarded a contract, to advise the agency which key personnel it intended to use on the
contract." The Comptroller General sustained a protest against the award stating:


                 [The awardee's] initial proposal failed to include letters of intent for all but
        two of the personnel it proposed to fill the key positions. Despite the agency's clear
        request during discussions that: "for any proposed personnel for which written
        assurances were not provided in your proposal, please provide letters of intent for
        such personnel," [The awardee] elected not to comply with this requirement.
        Accordingly, [the awardee's] final revised proposal should have been rejected for
        failing to comply with a material requirement of the solicitation.




                                                                                                            448
                                                   -11-
                                                                        •Tnfax CorporatIOn, CAB No. P-624
                                                                                                               [8096]




        In the instant matter IIU also refused to identify the specific nurses who would provide the
services. The District concedes that IIU did not identify the specific nurses who would be employed
under the contract, but rather that "IIU states that the seven registered nurses [it listed] were just
some of its nurses." (Response, at 7). Notwithstanding the specific contract provision that the nurses
should both be named and the time each would devote to the contract, in the Contracting Officer's
revised Determination he determined, contrary to the contract terms that:


       IIU had shown that it had the ability to provide licensed registered nurses. IIU had
       provided licensed nurses under three contracts in Maryland. IIU has more than seven
       licensed registered nurses available. The Contracting Officer concluded that if IIU
       could provide registered nurses in Maryland, IIU could provide registered nurses
       licensed in the District.

(Response, Ex. 2 at 4).


        It is apparent that the procurement integrity issue raised by the Comptroller General in the
Hornet case is relevant here. Although the Contracting Officer's Determination relies on the seven
registered nurses listed by IIU prior to award, when IIU began performance none of the listed nurses
was assigned to performance of the contract. 6 No assertion has been made that IIU ever requested
substitution, or that the Contracting Officer has ever even considered the substitutions.

        The Board takes no position as to whether the key employee designation and requirement to
name the nurses is a minimum need of the District. The Board must assume that by the specific
insertion of the clause in the contract was a determination of the minimum need and cannot be
ignored. The clause expressed a material term of the contract "considered to be essential to the work
being performed." The initial bid submitted by IIU did not commit itself to this term and was
therefore nonresponsive and ineligible for award. 7




        6 The seven nurses listed were Registered Nurses Cain, Ulu, Milbourne, Thomas, Joplin, White and
Butler. (AR, Ex. 11). The nurses assigned to the contract were Registered Nurses Cobb, Steel and Sumpter.
(Response, Ex. 2).

         7 Even if the requirement were considered to be an issue of responsibility which could be fulfilled

up to the time of award, nu never made such a proffer prior to award.




                                                                                                           449
                                                  -12-
                                                                     • Tnfax CorporatIOn, CAB No. P-624
                                                                                                            [8097]




          The protest is sustained. The District is directed to cancel the contract with IIU as void ab
initio.


SO ORDERED


DATED: January 8, 2001
                                                         MATTHEW S. WATSON
                                                         Administrative Judge


CONCURRING:




J~N~ZIS~
Administrative Judge




                                                                                                      CJ'




                                                                                                   450
