                    GOVERNMENT OF THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA
                          CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD


PROTEST OF:

       HOOD’S INSTITUTIONAL FOODS, INC.                       )
                                                              )     CAB No. P-0658
       Under Solicitation No. POHA-2002-B-0629                )


      For the Protester, Hood’s Institutional Foods, Inc.: Philip L. Kellogg, Esq., Kellogg, Williams
& Lyons. For the Government: Howard Schwartz, Esq., Assistant Corporation Counsel.

      Opinion by Administrative Judge Jonathan D. Zischkau, with Administrative Judge Matthew S.
Watson, concurring.

                                            OPINION
                                       CourtLink Filing ID 878031

       Hood’s Institutional Foods, Inc., protests the award of a summer food service contract to
Preferred Meal Systems, Inc., and the contracting officer’s determination that Hood’s bid was
nonresponsive for Hood’s failure to submit a performance bond. Hood alleges that it never received the
proper notice for the performance bond as required by the solicitation. We conclude that Hood received
adequate notice but failed to submit the performance bond. Accordingly, we deny the protest.

                                         BACKGROUND

        On June 16, 2002, the Office of Contracting and Procurement (“OCP”) issued an emergency
solicitation, RFQ No. POHA-2002-B-0629, on behalf of the Department of Parks and Recreation, for a
food service management company to prepare and deliver boxed breakfast and lunch meals to 49 Parks
and Recreation Centers and Boys and Girls Clubs from June 24, 2002, through August 30, 2002.
(Agency Report, CourtLink Filing ID 805642 (“AR”) at 3; Determination and Findings, CourtLink
Filing ID 775021 (“D&F”), filed June 28, 2002, Ex. B). The summer food service program is funded
by the United States Department of Agriculture (“USDA”). The following prospective bidders received
the RFQ: Hood’s Institutional Foods, J&K Distributors of Washington, D.C., Food Resource
Management, Martin’s Inc., THL Associates, Preferred Meal Systems, Inc., and Georgia Food Service
Inc. The RFQ required the successful contractor to prepare and deliver 4,275 breakfast meals and 5,225
lunch meals each weekday of the performance period. Section C.1.1 of the statement of work makes
applicable to the contract the USDA Summer Food Service Program regulations found at 7 CFR Part
225. Section C.3.7 provides:

       The successful Contractor shall provide to [the Department of Parks and Recreation] a
       performance bond and payment bond within 24 hours following notification that the
       Contractor is the lowest responsive and responsible bidder. The performance bond shall
       be 100% of the bid price and the payment bond shall be 50% of the bid price.
                                                 -2-             Hood’s Institutional Foods, Inc., CAB No. P-0658




       On June 11, 2002, OCP issued Amendment No. 1 to the RFQ, which extended the bid opening
from June 16 to June 17 and provided the following bidder question and OCP answer:

       Question: Is a bid bond required?

       Answer: A bid bond is not required. Only a performance bond and payment bond is
       required as indicated in paragraph C.3.7 on page 3 of the Scope of Work.

(D&F Ex. C).

         On June 17, 2002, OCP opened three bids: Hood’s in the amount of $709,887, Preferred Meal
Systems in the amount of $757,601, and Georgia Food Service in the amount of $765,514. (AR Exs. 4,
6; D&F Ex. D). Because Hood had the apparent low bid, OCP’s contract specialist contacted Mr. Hood
by telephone shortly after bid opening and advised him that Hood was the apparent low bidder and that
a letter would be faxed to him within an hour which would request that Hood submit responsibility data,
including the performance bond, by noon on June 19, 2002. (D&F at 1-2; D&F Ex. E). The
contracting officer did fax a letter to Hood that day, which stated that a “prospective contractor must
affirmatively demonstrate responsibility” and that the contracting officer “must make a determination of
nonresponsibility if the information obtained does not indicate clearly that the prospective contractor is
responsible.” (D&F Ex. E, at 1). In the letter, the contracting officer additionally states:

       In order for the contracting officer to make a decision, in accordance with the above
       [responsibility] regulation [27 DCMR § 2200], please respond to the following checked
       requests:

               ....

       8. Please provide a performance bond of 100% of the bid price and a payment bond of
          50% of the bid price.

       Please complete and return the information by 12:00 Noon, Wednesday, June 19, 2002.

(D&F Ex. E).

        In a telephone call to the contracting officer at some point during the morning of June 19, 2002,
Mr. Hood requested that Hood be given an extension of time to submit the responsibility data. The
contracting officer extended the deadline from noon to 1 p.m. on June 19. Hood’s response was
delivered at 1:15 p.m. (D&F at 2; D&F Ex. F). Hood’s responsibility data submission was incomplete.
Hood failed to produce a list of current contracts relating to the RFQ, a list of qualified personnel, a
copy of the truck leases, and the performance and payment bonds. In addition, Hood stated that it
intended “to accomplish the mission and meet the requirements in accordance with the contract by
relying on [Georgia] Food Services to provide most of the supplies for the contract.” (D&F Ex. F). In
its June 19 submission, Hood also furnished a letter of the same date from Inner Harbour Insurance Inc.,
addressed to Hood, advising Hood that Inner Harbour was in the process of evaluating Hood’s request
for a performance bond, and requesting certain additional information from Hood. (D&F Ex. F).
                                                -3-             Hood’s Institutional Foods, Inc., CAB No. P-0658


         At 9 a.m. on Thursday, June 20, the contracting officer called Mr. Hood, advising him that he
would receive a letter, by fax and email immediately after their conversation, requiring Hood to furnish
the missing responsibility data, by no later than 12 noon that day. Hood requested that the contracting
officer waive the performance bond requirement. The contracting officer replied that the USDA
mandated the bonding requirement and that OCP had to have the performance bond prior to awarding
the contract, and the deadline was important because contract performance was to begin Monday, June
24, at 8 a.m. Mr. Hood told the contracting officer that he would have no problem acquiring the
performance bond and that OCP would receive it when Hood submitted its response to the missing data
by 12 noon that day. (D&F at 3). After the telephone conversation, the contracting officer issued
Amendment No. 2 to the RFQ reducing the amount of the performance bond from 100 to 25 percent of
the bid price. (D&F Ex. H). Hood confirmed receipt of this amendment. (D&F at 3). The contracting
officer issued the written request for the missing responsibility data with the deadline changed from 12
to 4 p.m. that day. (AR Ex. 1).

       Later the same day, the contracting officer made a request to the USDA for waiver of the
performance bond requirement but that request was denied by the USDA in the afternoon. (D&F Ex. I).
Hood submitted the missing responsibility data to OCP later in the afternoon of June 20, but its
submission did not contain the required performance bond. In his cover letter, Mr. Hood stated:
“Bonding Company is currently processing the application.” (AR Ex. 2).

       During the morning of Friday, June 21, the contracting officer requested for a third time that
Hood provide the required performance bond, with a deadline of 12 noon, and if the bond was not
timely received, OCP would award the contract to the next low bidder. Hood failed to provide a
performance bond. (D&F at 3).

       The contracting officer determined Hood to be nonresponsible for failing to provide the
performance bond. (D&F at 3). Preferred Meal Services provided the required performance bond and
was awarded the contract in the afternoon of June 21. (AR Exs. 4-6). It began performance on
Monday, June 24, at 8 a.m. (D&F at 3).

       By letter dated June 24, 2002, the contracting officer advised Hood that the USDA had denied
the request for waiver of the performance bond, that Hood’s bid was deemed “nonresponsive” (the
contracting officer probably intended to say that Hood was determined to be “nonresponsible”) due to
Hood’s failure to provide a performance bond within 24 hours of notification that Hood was the
apparent low bidder, and that OCP had awarded to Preferred Meal Services the contract for summer
food service. (AR Ex. 3).

       On June 25, 2002, Hood filed its protest with the Board, contending that the District improperly
found Hood nonresponsible.

                                            DISCUSSION

       We exercise protest jurisdiction pursuant to D.C. Code § 2-309.03(a)(1) (2001).


       Hood argues that the District failed to give proper notice for the performance bond. Section
C.3.7 of the solicitation states that the contractor shall provide the performance bond within 24 hours
                                                -4-             Hood’s Institutional Foods, Inc., CAB No. P-0658


“following notification that the Contractor is the lowest responsive and responsible bidder.” Although
there is no dispute that the contracting officer notified Hood on June 17 to submit the performance bond
by June 19, Hood contends that the June 17 notice was merely notice that is was the apparent low
bidder, not that it was the low responsive and responsible bidder as section C.3.7 requires.

      The District responds that the contracting officer constructively amended the RFQ by requiring
submission of the performance and payment bonds prior to contract award and thus making the bond
submission requirement a part of the responsibility evaluation.

         We agree with the District under the facts present here that the contracting officer clearly
communicated that the performance bond was required as part of the responsibility evaluation, and that
Hood understood the requirement and agreed to fulfill it. The contracting officer twice extended the
deadline under this emergency procurement to accommodate Hood. The contracting officer also sought
a USDA waiver of the performance bond requirement although the USDA denied the request. Hood’s
failure to submit the performance bond under the circumstances was unreasonable. Accordingly, we
sustain the contracting officer’s determination that Hood was not responsible for its failure to furnish
the bond.

        The District also argues that Hood’s bid was nonresponsive because Hood intended to have a
subcontractor who was responsible for production of the meals. See 7 C.F.R. § 225.6(b)(2)(iii). The
record is not adequate to support finding Hood’s bid nonresponsive on that basis.

                                           CONCLUSION
        Having sustained the contracting officer’s determination that Hood was nonresponsible for
failing to submit a performance bond, we deny Hood’s protest.

       SO ORDERED.

DATED: August 23, 2002                                /s/ Jonathan D. Zischkau
                                                      JONATHAN D. ZISCHKAU
                                                      Administrative Judge


CONCURRING:


/s/ Matthew S. Watson
MATTHEW S. WATSON
Administrative Judge
