                               GOVERNMENT OF THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA
                                CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD
PROTEST OF:

Fort Myer Construction Corporation                                    )
                                                                      )        CAB No. P-0688
Under Solicitation No. POKA-2003-B-0048-JJ                            )

       For the Protester, Fort Myer Construction Corp.: Joe R. Caldwell, Jr., Esq., O. Kevin
Vincent, Esq. and Robert J. Wagman, Esq., Baker Botts L.L.P. For the Intevenor, Capitol
Paving of D.C.: Douglas Datt, Esq., Gavett and Datt, P.C. For the Government: Howard S.
Schwartz, Esq. and Talia S. Cohen, Esq., Assistants Attorney General.

       Opinion by Administrative Judge Matthew S. Watson with Chief Administrative Judge
Jonathan D. Zischkau and Administrative Judge Warren J. Nash concurring.

                                                  OPINION
                                         (LexisNexis Filing ID 3742512)

        Fort Myer Construction Corporation was the second low bidder on each of the two award
groups of a procurement for paving services. The Lane Construction Corporation was the low
bidder on each award group. Fort Myer protested against award of both award groups to Lane
alleging that the solicitation forbids award of both award groups to the same contractor. The
District asserts that the language of the solicitation does not require award of each of the two
award groups to different contractors. The Board finds that the language relied upon is, at best,
ambiguous, and that the ambiguity was apparent prior to bid opening. A protest based upon
alleged improprieties in a solicitation which are apparent prior to bid opening . . . shall be filed
with the Board prior to bid opening . . . .” Rule 302.2(a). As the subject protest was filed after
bid opening, the protest is untimely. Fort Myer’s protest is dismissed.

                                               DISCUSSION

        The subject solicitation was issued December 5, 2003, requesting bids for repairs to
curbs, gutters, sidewalks, utility cuts, and base pavements citywide. On February 12, 2004, the
Contracting Officer issued Addendum 3, which, among other changes, requested separate bids
for work in Wards 1 through 4 and Wards 5 through 8. The addendum added a new Section I.19,
entitled “Manner of Award” which states:

        It is the District’s intention to make multiple awards to two separate contractors. Award, if made
        will be to a separate bidder in the aggregate for each group of items indicated by the Aggregate
        Award Group as listed below. Bidder must quote unit prices on each item within each group to
        receive consideration. In the event that the District is unable to make an aggregate award, the
        District may award on an individual basis each item within an aggregate award. NO BIDDER
        WILL BE AWARDED MORE THAN ONE AWARD GROUP. (Emphasis in original).

        I.19.1 Award Group 1- Wards 1, 2, 3 and 4

        I.19.2 Award Group 2 – Wards 5, 6, 7 and 8.

(Exhibit 1).
                                                         2         Fort Myer Construction Corp., CAB No. P-0688


       Although inartfully worded, the inserted clause clearly provided that the entire citywide
requirement would not be awarded to a single contractor. The inserted clause divided the
citywide requirements into two award groups and stated that the District would make awards to
“two separate contractors.” The clause emphasized its intent by summarizing at the end of the
paragraph in all capital letters “NO BIDDER WILL BE AWARDED MORE THAN ONE
AWARD GROUP.”

       On February 26, 2004, the contracting officer issued Addendum 4, which replaced1
Section I.19 as added by Addendum 3 with a new Section I.19 reading as follows:

        It is the District’s intention to award two separate contracts. Award, if made will be to a separate
        bidder in the aggregate for each group of items indicated by the Aggregate Award Group as listed
        below. Bidder must quote unit prices on each item within each group to receive consideration.

        I.19.1 Award Group 1 – Wards 1, 2, 3 and 4

        I.19.2 Award Group 2 – Wards 5, 6, 7 and 8.

(Exhibit 1).

         The revised clause contained in Addendum 4 is less clear than the Addendum 3 clause,
but, if read alone, it could reasonably be interpreted also to preclude award of both award groups
to a single contractor. The first sentence of the Addendum 3 clause is modified in the Addendum
4 clause to state that the District intends to “award two separate contracts” instead of to make
“multiple awards to two separate contractors.” This modification of the language supports the
District’s assertion that award was permissible to only one contractor. The second sentence,
however, remains unchanged. It reads “Award, if made will be to a separate bidder in the
aggregate for each group.” While the term “separate contracts” in the revised first sentence
could include two contracts made with a single contractor, or two contracts made with two
contactors, it is more difficult to read “a separate bidder . . . for each group” in the unchanged
second sentence as meaning anything other than award to two separate contractors, since it
would make little sense to refer to each of the bids from the same contractor for each of the
separate award groups as coming from “a separate bidder.” But the second sentence in
Addendum 4 cannot be read in isolation. Addendum 4 followed and changed a clause inserted
by Addendum 3. It is not therefore reasonable to assume the revised clause was not intended to
make any change from the original clause. An interpretation which gives reasonable meaning to
an amendment is preferred to an interpretation which renders the amendment superfluous. See,
Restatement, Second, Contracts § 203, Comment b. This is particularly true where, as here, the
drafter of Addendum 4 specifically deleted the emphasized notice that “no bidder will be
awarded more than one award group.” The deletion clearly indicated that the District intended to
reserve the right to award both award groups to a single contractor. In context, the most
reasonable interpretation of the Addendum 4 clause is that the District was permitted to award
both award groups to a single contractor. At best, the language of the clause is ambiguous.

        Fort Myer filed this protest after bid opening. Pursuant to statute and our rules, “[a]
protest based upon alleged improprieties in a solicitation apparent prior to bid opening . . . shall
be filed with the Board prior to bid opening . . . .” D.C. Code § 2-309.09 and Rule 302.2(a). “A
bidder who fails to seek clarification of an ambiguity on the face of a solicitation prior to bid
1
  The Board assumes that the new language replaced the previous section of the same designation. The Addendum
is silent as to whether the original § I.19 was to be deleted.
                                                            3         Fort Myer Construction Corp., CAB No. P-0688


opening risks a contrary interpretation of the allegedly ambiguous provision and is precluded
from raising such issues to the Board after opening.” Maryland Construction, Inc., CAB No. P-
0650, Jan. 17, 2002, 50 D.C. Reg. 7398, 7399. Here, the better reading of Addendum 4’s section
I.19 is that the District retained the right to award both award groups to a single contractor. To
the extent that the language could be read differently, Fort Myer was obligated to seek
clarification prior to bid opening. It did not do so. Accordingly, the protest is dismissed as
untimely.2



June 16, 2004                                                                    /s/ Matthew S. Watson
                                                                           MATTHEW S. WATSON
                                                                           Administrative Judge

Concur:

       /s/ Jonathan D. Zischkau
JONATHAN D. ZISCHKAU
Chief Administrative Judge

      /s/ Warren J. Nash
WARREN J. NASH
Administrative Judge




2
    In light of the Board’s decision to dismiss the protest as untimely, Protester’s Request for Discovery is denied.
