               DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD


PROTESTS OF:

HUMILITY OUTREACH MISSIONARY                          )
     MINISTRIES, INC.                                 )
                                                      )       CAB Nos. P-0788, P-0789, P-0793
Under RFP No. RM-08-RFP-021-BY4-CPA                   )

       For the Protester: Susan L. Schor, Esq., McManus, Schor, Asmar & Darden, LLP. For
the District of Columbia Government: Talia S. Cohen, Esq., and Robert Schildkraut, Esq.,
Assistant Attorneys General.

                                           OPINION
                                         Filing ID 25459586


        Humility Outreach Missionary Ministries, Inc. (“Humility”) has protested the District’s
award of four IDIQ contracts to provide supported residential services to consumers diagnosed
as having a serious and persistent mental illness. Humility argues inter alia that the source
selection decision and the technical evaluations were unreasonable and arbitrary and not properly
documented and that the contracting officer used undisclosed and improper evaluation criteria in
assessing the merits of the competing offers. Although the contracting officer’s own evaluations
and selection decision were poorly documented, we conclude that the record as a whole supports
the awards. Accordingly, we deny the consolidated protests.

                                       BACKGROUND

        On May 16, 2008, the District issued solicitation RM-08-RFP-021-BY4-CPA for the
District's Department of Mental Health (“DMH”) seeking offerors to provide supported
residential services to consumers diagnosed as having a serious and persistent mental illness,
who do not currently have a level of functioning that would allow them to live independently
within the community, and who choose to live in a Mental Health Community Residential
Facility (“MHCRF”). (Agency Report (“AR”) Ex. 1). A MHCRF is defined in Section C.3.10
as “a publicly or privately owned residence that houses individuals, 18 or older, with a principal
diagnosis of mental illness and who require twenty-four (24) hours per day/seven (7) days per
week on-site supervision, personal assistance, lodging, along with meals . . . .” Section B.2 of
the solicitation stated that the District contemplated awarding multiple indefinite delivery
indefinite quantity (“IDIQ”) contracts sufficient to ensure services to a maximum of 223
consumers. (AR Ex. 1). Section M of the solicitation provided the following technical
evaluation criteria and maximum scores: technical understanding of the requirement and
technical approach (30 points), management plan (20 points), quality improvement plan (10
points), and personnel (15 points). The other evaluation factors were: past performance
evaluation (10 points) and price evaluation (15 points). On May 20, 2008, the District placed an
advertisement announcing the solicitation in the Washington Times. (AR Ex. 2). On May 28,
                                                 -2-           Humility Outreach Missionary Ministries
                                                                    CAB Nos. P-0788, P-0789, P-0793

2008, the District conducted a pre-proposal conference. (AR Ex. 2). Between May 28, 2008,
and June 13, 2008, the District issued four amendments to the solicitation. (AR Ex. 1).

        The solicitation closed on June 23, 2008. (AR Ex. 1). The District received proposals
from ten offerors, including Humility. (AR Ex. 2). Samuel J. Feinberg, the Director of
Contracts and Procurement and Agency Chief Contracting Officer for DMH, and the contracting
officer and source selection authority for this solicitation, appointed three persons to conduct a
technical evaluation of the proposals. On June 25-27, 2008, and July 2, 2008, the District's
technical evaluation panel (“TEP”) evaluated the proposals. The contracting officer states that
during the evaluation of initial proposals, the evaluators always met as a group with the contract
specialist present, each evaluator reviewed each technical proposal individually and assigned a
preliminary score, and the evaluators then discussed each proposal as a group, including their
preliminary scores for each evaluation factor, and the strengths and weaknesses noted by each
evaluator. (Feinberg First Supplemental Declaration ¶¶ 5-9). After the group discussion, each
evaluator reached his or her own final score for each evaluation factor, with the scores and
supporting narratives for each evaluation factor being recorded on the technical evaluation
criteria worksheets. (Id. ¶¶ 10-11). There was no separate consensus report of the TEP
summarizing its findings. After all evaluations of all technical proposals had been completed,
each evaluator then reviewed each price proposal, discussed each price proposal as a group, and
made narrative comments on the price proposal review and comment sheets. (Id. ¶ 12). The
summary score for each evaluation factor was the average of the scores of the three members of
the TEP. (Id. ¶ 22).

        After the TEP completed its evaluation, the contracting officer met with the contract
specialist to review the TEP’s evaluation criteria worksheets and to discuss details of the
proposals. (AR Ex. 3, at 35). The contracting officer states that he reviewed each proposal and
then analyzed the proposed capacities (number of consumers that could be served) of each
offeror against the anticipated capacity required by the District as identified in section 8.2 of the
solicitation to determine a competitive range. (AR Ex. 3). Capacity was not an evaluation factor
and thus did not affect a competitive range determination. It is not clear that any offeror was
excluded from the competitive range. We believe that the contracting officer simply misused the
term “competitive range” in this context.

         By letter dated July 16, 2008, the District entered into discussions with all offerors. (AR
Ex. 2). By letter dated July 17, 2008, the District outlined for each offeror the deficiencies in its
initial proposal and scheduled a meeting with each offeror to discuss its proposal. (AR Ex. 2).
On July 21-24, 2008, the District met with each offeror and discussed its proposal. (AR Ex. 2).
By letter dated July 25, 2008, the District notified each offeror that discussions had concluded
and requested that each offeror submit a Best and Final Offer (“BAFO”). (AR Ex. 2). On July
31, 2008, each offeror submitted a BAFO. (AR Ex. 2).

        On August 5-7, 2008, the TEP evaluated the BAFOs. (AR Ex. 3). On August 21, 2008,
the contracting officer reviewed each BAFO and the findings of the TEP regarding the BAFOs.
(AR Ex. 3). On August 21, 2008, the contracting officer also concluded a review of the
tabulated final combined scores (technical, price, past performance, and CBE preferences) and
rankings of each offeror and performed an independent assessment. (AR at 5; AR Ex. 2). The
                                                 -3-           Humility Outreach Missionary Ministries
                                                                    CAB Nos. P-0788, P-0789, P-0793

contracting officer concurred with the TEP’s evaluation of the offerors and concluded that
awarding contracts to the four highest ranked offerors for the full consumer capacity that each
had proposed would result in the award of contracts for services with a capacity of 225
consumers, two more than the 223 maximum slots stated in the solicitation. (AR at 5; AR Exs.
2, 3).

       On September 19, 2008, DMH notified the successful and unsuccessful offerors of
DMH's decision to award contracts, subject to the prior approval of the City Council, as
applicable. (AR at 5-6; AR Ex. 2). On September 27-28, 2008, proposed contracts with
Community Connections, Inc., Life Stride, Inc., and Careco Health Services, Inc., were deemed
approved by the Council. (AR at 6; AR Ex. 2). On October 1, 2008, the contracting officer
executed contracts with Deaf-REACH, Community Connections, Life Stride, and Careco Health
Services, and the contractors began performance. (AR at 6; AR Ex. 2).

        DMH conducted a debriefing for Humility on October 7, 2008, attended by the
contracting officer and the contract specialist, as well as David Gilmore for Humility. (AR Exs.
2, 4). The contracting officer recorded in a declaration dated November 12, 2008 (AR Ex. 4), the
comments he made at the October 7 debriefing. He states that Humility received an acceptable
rating for the personnel factor because Humility had 3 years of experience as an organization
while the successful offerors had many more years. (AR Ex. 4 ¶ 5). The contracting officer
states that Humility’s proposed solution for the licensed clinical supervisor to oversee residential
services had deficiencies which was a weakness for its quality improvement plan and personnel,
while the awardees scored higher not only because of longer experience but because their
personnel credentials including the clinical supervisor were stronger. (Id. ¶ 5). The contracting
officer also explained in the debriefing the reason for Humility’s score for the quality
improvement plan factor and the weakness associated with the experience and qualifications of
Humility’s proposed licensed clinical supervisor. (Id. ¶¶ 7-8).

       Humility filed protests on October 15 and 20, and December 1, 2008.


                                          DISCUSSION

        We exercise jurisdiction over these consolidated protests pursuant to D.C. Code § 2-
309.03(a)(1). Humility raises a number of challenges to the awards, most of which question the
propriety of the evaluations of Humility’s and the awardees’ proposals and the contracting
officer’s source selection decision.

        Humility contends that the technical evaluation panel did not properly compare the
offerors’ proposals and failed to prepare the required documentation of its evaluations. In its
first supplemental protest, Humility correctly observes that there is no consensus technical
evaluation report of the panel containing the bases, analyses, and summary of findings. Humility
points out that the record here contains only the evaluators’ worksheets and evaluation score
summaries of the initial proposals and BAFOs. Although Humility urges that the evaluations do
not identify relative differences among the proposals, proposals’ strengths or weaknesses, and
proposals’ risks vis-à-vis the stated evaluation criteria, we do not agree. The evaluators’
                                               -4-           Humility Outreach Missionary Ministries
                                                                  CAB Nos. P-0788, P-0789, P-0793

worksheets contain reasonably detailed proposal strengths and weaknesses and risks that
highlight the relative differences among the proposals. Clearly, it would have made the record
far stronger if the contracting officer had obtained a consensus evaluation report from the TEP.
More importantly, the contracting officer’s documentation of his independent evaluation of the
offers is quite thin, limited to his concurrence with the TEP’s evaluations, his evaluation
narrative for the four awardees in the business clearance memoranda, and his notes of his
debriefing explanations to Humility. The evaluation record should have been documented with a
comprehensive evaluation narrative, scoring, and ranking of all offerors and supported by the
TEP’s evaluation work papers and preferably also a consensus report. Despite the shortcomings
in the record, we are able to discern adequate documentation of the technical evaluation of the
top four ranked offerors and Humility as contained in the evaluation worksheets, the scoring
summaries, the business clearance memoranda, and the contracting officer’s declarations
including his notes of the debriefing. The contracting officer states that he concurred in the
technical evaluation made by the TEP and we see adequate narrative and analysis by the
evaluators with respect to the solicitation’s evaluation criteria to support his conclusion.

        Humility argues that it was improperly downgraded in the experience, quality
improvement plan, and the qualified practitioner requirement. We have carefully considered
Humility’s arguments, but find that the evaluation was neither arbitrary nor contrary to the
evaluation criteria stated in the solicitation. Nor can we conclude that the record shows that
either DMH or the contracting officer determined in advance to limit the number of awardees to
the offerors with the largest capacity. Clearly, the four offerors with the largest capacity were
not the four ultimate awardees. We see no basis for concluding that the capacity of an offeror
was improperly used as an undisclosed evaluation factor. The record supports the contracting
officer’s position that capacity of offerors was used only to determine how many awards would
be made, beginning with the highest ranked offeror and proceeding to make awards until the
maximum capacity was met.

       In connection with the evaluation and selection challenge, Humility argues that the
contracting officer failed to conduct a cost/technical tradeoff and support his decision that the
successful proposals were the most advantageous to the District, price and technical factors
considered. The business clearance memoranda, supported by the evaluation worksheets,
provide adequate support for the contracting officer’s conclusion that the offers of the four
awardees were the most advantageous to the District.

        Humility argues that the District never intended to award any contract to a number of the
offerors including Humility. On June 9, 2008, the District issued solicitation amendment 2
which, inter alia, provided that only DMH-certified Mental Health Rehabilitative Services
(“MHRS”) providers could submit offers. (AR Ex. 1, Amendment 2 § L.21.3). This requirement
was removed by Amendment 4. (AR Ex. 1, Amendment 4). According to Humility, the putative
opening of the solicitation to contractors not certified as MHRS providers was a sham, with
DMH intending only to award contracts to certified MHRS providers, notwithstanding the
relaxation of the specifications. In fact, all of the awardees are certified MHRS providers.
Humility infers that DMH never intended to award to a non-MHRS certified provider, and
concludes that the award process and awards were unreasonable, arbitrary, and contrary to the
law that requires full and open competition. We have reviewed the entire record and find no
                                                -5-           Humility Outreach Missionary Ministries
                                                                   CAB Nos. P-0788, P-0789, P-0793

evidence that DMH intended to award only to certified MHRS providers notwithstanding
Amendment 4.

         Humility also argues that the contracting officer did not fairly consider Humility for
award and never intended to make an award to Humility even if it were the top ranked offeror.
District counsel’s comment that the “District has no intention of ‘moving’ [the existing six] . . .
consumers [at Humility’s facility] whether you win or lose the bid protest” refers, according to
the contracting officer, to the fact that Humility has been operating as an independent MHCRF
rather than as a contracted MHCRF. MHCRFs are licensed by DMH as part of the District’s
continuum of mental health care. (AR Ex. 43 ¶ 23, First Supplemental Declaration of Samuel J.
Feinberg, dated December 18, 2008). Consumers are informed of their residential options by
their core service agency and can elect to be placed at an independent MHCRF. A core service
agency is a “community-based provider of mental health services and mental health supports that
is certified by DMH and that acts as a clinical home for Consumers of mental health services by
providing a single point of access and accountability for diagnostic assessment, medication-
somatic treatment, counseling and psychotherapy, community support services, and access to
other needed services.” (RFP Section C.3.1). Independent MHCRFs determine on their own
how they provide services and to whom, subject to licensing requirements contained in 22
DCMR Chapter 38. (AR Ex. 43). Some MHCRFs have a contract with the District and those
contracted MHCRFs must abide by the contractual requirements they have with the District and
presumably accept consumer slots referred to them by the District. Here, Humility was
anticipating that if it won an award under the solicitation, it could convert its current six
consumers from the lower reimbursement rates for independently placed consumers it now
receives to the significantly higher contract rates. We need not address this issue because we
find no legal error in the awards made by the contracting officer to the four higher ranked
offerors. We do not believe it was reasonable, in any event, for Humility to assume that its six
existing consumers would be converted necessarily to six of the 223 contracted consumer slots
identified in the solicitation if Humility was selected for award. Humility should have sought
clarification from the contracting officer prior to the submission of proposals on the question of
the specific status of the six preexisting consumers receiving services from Humility.

        Humility also raises a number of other challenges regarding whether the awardees were
required to have MHCRF licensed properties when they submitted their proposals, whether the
past performance evaluations of Careco and Life Stride were reasonable, and whether awards
were made to offerors whose proposals were deficient. We agree with the District that these
arguments have no merit. Humility does not demonstrate that the solicitation required properties
to be purchased or rented at the time of the proposal due date. We have examined the record
regarding the past performance evaluations of Careco and Life Stride and the alleged proposal
deficiencies but we find no basis for sustaining the protests on these grounds.

                                        CONCLUSION

        In sum, we have carefully considered each of the challenges raised by Humility, and
conclude that the contracting officer’s evaluation and selection actions were not contrary to the
law or the terms of the solicitation. The detailed evaluation worksheets prepared by the technical
evaluation panel members and the contracting officer’s analysis found in the business clearance
                                            -6-           Humility Outreach Missionary Ministries
                                                               CAB Nos. P-0788, P-0789, P-0793

memoranda and his declarations are adequate to support the awards. Accordingly, we deny the
consolidated protests.

      SO ORDERED.

DATED: June 2, 2009                               /s/ Jonathan D. Zischkau
                                                  JONATHAN D. ZISCHKAU
                                                  Chief Administrative Judge


CONCURRING:


/s/ Warren J. Nash
WARREN J. NASH
Administrative Judge
