                     GOVERNMENT OF THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA
                           CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD



PROTEST OF:

PROFESSIONAL RECRUITERS, INC.                  )
                                               )   CAB No. P-0700
Under RFQ No. 158548                           )

      For the Protester, Mr. Thomas N. Nelson, pro se. For the District of Columbia Government:
Howard Schwartz, Esq., Talia S. Cohen, Esq., Assistant Attorneys General, D.C.

      Opinion by Chief Administrative Judge Jonathan D. Zischkau, with Administrative Judges
Matthew S. Watson and Warren J. Nash, concurring.

                                OPINION DISMISSING PROTEST
                                       LexisNexis Filing ID 4824930

        Professional Recruiters, Inc., has protested the District’s rejection of its bid for professional
recruiting services. The District of Columbia’s Office of Contracting and Procurement (“OCP”) had
determined that Professional Recruiters’ bid was unreasonably low. The District has moved to dismiss
the protest as untimely filed. Because Professional Recruiters learned of the basis of its protest on
September 3, 2004, but waited until September 24, 2004, to file, the protest is untimely. Accordingly,
we dismiss the protest.

                                           BACKGROUND

         On August 30, 2004, OCP issued a Request for Quotation (“RFQ”) No. 158548 for Executive
Level of Hiring and Placement Services for the recruiting of a fiscal director and a project management
office director for the Office of the Chief Technology Officer (“OCTO”). (Agency Report (“AR”) at 2,
AR Ex. 1). The RFQ consisted of a single page containing the following description of the services:
“Executive Level of hiring and placement services for OCTO’s Fiscal Director and Director, Project
Management Officer (See attached job descriptions)” plus the two referenced job descriptions. OCP
initially issued the RFQ to three entities: Stanton Chase International, Insource Solutions, and Julerine,
Inc. On September 1, 2004, Julerine submitted a quote of $45,659 for the services. On September 2,
OCP issued the RFQ to two more vendors, Worldwide Recruiters, Inc., and Professional Recruiters. On
September 3, Worldwide submitted a quote of $56,250, and Professional Recruiters submitted a quote
of $20,000. (AR at 2, AR Ex. 2). Later the same day, two OCP contracting officers spoke on the
telephone with the president of Professional Recruiters, Mr. Thomas N. Nelson, and advised him that
Professional Recruiters did not receive the award because its price was unrealistically low. (AR at 2,
AR Ex. 3). On September 7, OCP awarded the contract to Julerine. By facsimile dated September 13,
Professional Recruiters responded to the September 3 telephone conference regarding the OCP decision
to reject its quote as unrealistic, as follows:

       In response to the Contracting Officers’ allegations that PRI was not competitive based
       upon other quotations, the attached detailed substantiation is submitted. Our
       substantiation shows the rationale used in arriving at the price of $20,000 for two
                                                 -2-                  Professional Recruiters, CAB No. P-0700


        profession[al]s at the [pay grade 15] 5th step. PRI has been in the professional
        recruitment and placement business since 1974. Also, we have worked in the
        Washington, DC area since 1976. I would be happy to speak with you and or your
        officers to explain our proposal at your convenience. . . .

(AR Ex. 4). OCP apparently did not respond to Nelson’s letter. On September 24, 2004, Professional
Recruiters wrote to OCP, formally protesting OCP’s rejection of its quote. The letter, with a subject
line reading “Formal Protest to Disqualification of Proposal Submitted in Response to RFQ
158548,”clearly protests OCP’s September 3 rejection of its quote, arguing that its quote for
professional recruitment services was reasonable under the criteria set forth in Federal Acquisition
Regulation (“FAR”) 31.201-3. (AR at 2, AR Ex. 5). Upon receiving a protest mistakenly sent to the
OCP contracting officer, rather than to the Board, the OCP contracting officer should have immediately
forwarded to us the misdirected protest. OCP erroneously notified Professional Recruiters on October 4
to file its protest with us. (AR at 2, AR Ex. 6). Professional Recruiters filed its protest directly with us
on October 13, but as the District recognizes, we treat it as filed on September 24, the date the protest
was received by the OCP contracting officer.

       On November 3, 2004, the District moved to dismiss the protest as untimely filed. Professional
Recruiters filed an opposition on December 10, 2004.

                                              DISCUSSION

        We exercise jurisdiction pursuant to D.C. Code § 2-309.03(a)(1).

       The Procurement Practices Act provides the following in D.C. Code § 2-309.08 with regard to
an award protest:

        (a)    This section shall apply to a protest of a solicitation or award of a contract
        addressed to the Board by any actual or prospective bidder, offeror, or contractor who is
        aggrieved in connection with the solicitation or award of a contract.

        ....

        (b)(2) In cases other than those [based upon alleged improprieties in a solicitation] . . . ,
        protests shall be filed not later than 10 business days after the basis of protest is known
        or should have been known, whichever is earlier.

         We have recently restated that this 10-business day period begins when the bidder or offeror
knows or should have known the basis of its protest and the party has become aggrieved in connection
with the award by an official action adverse to that party. Sigal Construction Corp., CAB No. P-0690,
et al., Nov. 24, 2004. In the present case, Professional Recruiters concedes that it received notice on
September 3, 2004, that its quote would not be further considered for the award because the price was
not reasonable. Professional Recruiters also agrees that its letter of September 13 was not intended as a
protest and that it did not in fact submit its protest until September 24. Because it filed its protest more
than 10 business days after September 3 when it received official notification of an action adverse to it
in connection with an award, Professional Recruiters’ protest is untimely.
                                                -3-                  Professional Recruiters, CAB No. P-0700




        We have reservations about the OCP contracting officers’ determination to exclude the quote of
Professional Recruiters without first requesting and evaluating the bidder’s pricing information,
particularly where, as here, contractors have significant latitude in how they price direct costs for these
services. In addition, we have concerns that the contracting officers here did not appreciate that a bid
price below the cost of performance is not objectionable for that reason alone. M.C. Dean, Inc., CAB
No. P-0654, July 30, 2002 50 D.C. Reg. 7447, 7449; C.P.F. Corp., CAB No. P-0521, Jan. 12, 1998, 45
D.C. Reg. 8697, 8700. Whether the contract can be performed at a price below the cost of performance
is a matter of bidder responsibility, but Professional Recruiters’ responsibility did not seem to be
considered by the contracting officers. Finally, contracting officers should notify bidders and offerors
in writing and without delay when making determinations such as to award or not to consider further a
firm’s bid or offer.

       Professional Recruiters’ protest is dismissed as untimely.


       SO ORDERED.


DATED: December 21, 2004                               /s/ Jonathan D. Zischkau
                                                       JONATHAN D. ZISCHKAU
                                                       Chief Administrative Judge


CONCURRING:



/s/ Matthew S. Watson
MATTHEW S. WATSON
Administrative Judge



/s/ Warren J. Nash
WARREN J. NASH
Administrative Judge
