               DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD


PROTEST OF:

C&D TREE SERVICE, INC.                                 )
                                                       )             CAB No. P-0780
Under Contract No. DCKA-2007-B-0159                    )


       For the Protester, C&D Tree Service, Inc: Richard L. Moorhouse, Esq., Sean M. Connolly,
Esq., David T. Hickey, Esq., Greenberg Traurig, LLC. For the District of Columbia Government:
Howard Schwartz, Esq., Senior Assistant Attorney General, and Alton E. Woods, Esq., Assistant
Attorney General.

      Opinion by Chief Administrative Judge Jonathan D. Zischkau, with Administrative Judge
Warren J. Nash, concurring.

                                            OPINION
                                          Filing ID 21771414

       C&D Tree Service protests the District’s awards of indefinite delivery, indefinite quantity
(“IDIQ”) contracts on February 21 and March 3, 2008, to four other bidders on a solicitation issued
for emergency tree and debris removal services. C&D claims that although those contracts called
for only emergency tree and debris removal services, the District of Columbia Department of
Transportation (“DDOT”) Urban Forestry Administration improperly has been issuing work orders
for routine tree removal services during the performance of the IDIQ contracts. C&D is the
incumbent contractor under an existing requirements contract to perform all routine tree removal
services. As a losing bidder in the recent solicitation for emergency tree and debris removal
services, C&D asserts that it has been competitively prejudiced by alleged “material changes in the
scope of work now being directed or allowed by the District in the performance of the IDIQ
contracts.” We dismiss the protest because the alleged constructive changes in the scope of work are
contract performance issues rather than award challenges subject to protest.

                                        BACKGROUND

      On October 19, 2007, the District’s Department of Transportation (“DDOT”) issued in the
open market Invitation No. DCKA-2007-B-0159 (“IFB”) to provide emergency tree and debris
removal services. (Protest, Attachment A). Section C.2 states that:

       The District has a recurring need to provide emergency tree removal service during a
       storm event or emergency situation, which will require the use of a crane or log truck
       to complete the work. It includes trees that fall into public space or from public
       space to private space and trees that have been identified as “standing hazardous
       trees” that need to be removed to prevent a public safety issue. . . .

The IFB contemplated award of four IDIQ fixed unit price contracts. (Id., IFB Section B). Bids
were opened on November 21, 2007. (Motion to Dismiss, at 2).
                                                   -2-           C&D Tree Service, Inc., CAB No. P-0780


       After evaluation, DDOT awarded contracts for emergency tree and debris removal services
under the IFB to: Heavy Equipment Training Academy, LLC, on February 21, 2008, Excel Tree
Expert Company on February 21, 2008, Community Bridge, Inc., on March 3, 2008, and Adirondack
Tree Experts on March 3, 2008. (Id.). By letter dated March 4, 2008, the contracting officer
informed C&D that it had awarded to other bidders the four contracts for emergency tree and debris
removal services. (Id.).

        C&D states that it is a long-standing contractor providing tree removal services to the
District under POKA-2003-B00076-JBY, a requirements contract DDOT awarded to C&D on
November 19, 2003. (Protest, Attachment B). According to C&D, under the terms of its
requirements contract, the District agreed to purchase its requirements for the removal of all standing
dead, dangerous, and diseased trees from C&D. (Protest, at 2). DDOT exercised several options to
extend C&D's period of performance through November 18, 2008. (Protest, Attachment C). Despite
the C&D requirements contract, C&D asserts that the District’s arborists have provided information
regarding numerous delivery orders issued by DDOT under the four 2008 IDIQ contracts where the
work relates to routine, non-emergency tree removal services covered by C&D’s 2003 requirements
contract. (Protest, at 3-5, and Attachment D). We observe that C&D’s work order data shows work
orders presumably being assigned to C&D between August 2006 through 2008 under its
requirements contract but later reassigned to one of the new IDIQ contractors in 2008. The record
does not provide information regarding the dates of reassignment or the reasons for reassignment.
There may well be some overlap between the requirements contract’s specification for the removal
of standing “dangerous” trees and the IDIQ contracts’ specification for the removal of “standing
hazardous trees” but C&D did not file a protest of the IDIQ solicitation so we need not address that
here.

        On July 10, 2008, C&D filed its protest, contending that C&D was competitively prejudiced
since DDOT improperly issued delivery orders under the four IDIQ contracts for routine tree
removal services and thus modifying or relaxing the contract specifications of the IDIQ contracts.
C&D urges that DDOT should terminate the four IDIQ contracts for convenience and recompete the
District’s emergency tree removal needs under a “legally sufficient solicitation.”

                                           DISCUSSION

       We exercise jurisdiction pursuant to D.C. Code § 2-309.03(a)(1).

       The District has moved to dismiss the protest on the ground that C&D is alleging essentially
a contract dispute under its requirements contract, rather than a protest of the new awards. Both
C&D and the District recognize the general rule that a protester’s argument that an agency
improperly relaxed specification requirements after award is based on contract performance and is
thus not a proper ground for protest. Shane Meats Co., CAB Nos. P-0339 et al., Jan. 8, 1993, 40
D.C. Reg. 4885, 4899. The parties also recognize an exception to this rule where the agency
modifies or relaxes the specifications in the awarded contract so that a bidder is competitively
prejudiced because a competition for the contract as modified could have been materially different
from the competition originally obtained. M&M Welding and Fabricators, Inc., CAB No. P-0542,
Mar. 15, 1999, 46 D.C. Reg. 8576, 8579-80. Under the circumstances of this case, we agree with the
                                                   -3-           C&D Tree Service, Inc., CAB No. P-0780

District that the protest should be dismissed under the general rule that the matter involves contract
performance issues properly addressed under our disputes jurisdiction.

         M&M Welding and GAO precedent create a limited exception to the general rule where the
modification or relaxation of a material term of the solicitation happens at the time of contract award
or so close to award that it demonstrates the agency’s intention to change or relax the contract term
at the time of the award. In the present case, it is clear that the IDIQ contracts as awarded did not
modify the solicitation’s emergency tree removal services specification. There is no evidence that
DDOT intended such a change at the time of award. Indeed, there has not been any change to the
tree removal services through contract modification. Rather, C&D claims that DDOT has
effectively modified the IDIQ contracts during performance by issuing delivery orders that cover
routine tree removal work, not just emergency removal work. Even the record on this point is
ambiguous. Work that may have been identified initially as routine when assigned to C&D under its
requirements contract could later become emergency removal work after the passage of time or due
to other causes. C&D says it did not learn of the alleged changes or relaxation until long after the
awards and the beginning of performance. If some of the work assigned to C&D in 2007 was
emergency tree removal services (the IDIQ emergency removal contracts were not awarded until
February and March 2008), C&D could not complain that such work was reassigned to the four
IDIQ contractors after the awards. Finally, as noted above, there may be some overlap between the
requirements contract’s specification for the removal of standing “dangerous” trees and the IDIQ
contracts’ specification for the removal of “standing hazardous trees.” In any event, these issues are
performance issues properly resolved under our dispute jurisdiction, not under our protest
jurisdiction.

      Because C&D raises issues that are properly contract administration issues rather than protest
grounds, we dismiss the protest.

       SO ORDERED.

DATED: September 30, 2008                              /s/ Jonathan D. Zischkau
                                                       JONATHAN D. ZISCHKAU
                                                       Chief Administrative Judge



CONCURRING:


/s/ Warren J. Nash
WARREN J. NASH
Administrative Judge
