                    GOVERNMENT OF THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA
                          CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD



PROTEST OF:

SYSTEMS ASSESSMENT & RESEARCH, INC.                           )
                                                              )      CAB No. P-0738
Under Solicitation No. GAGA-2006-R-0176                       )


       For the Protester: Julian H. Spirer, Esq., and Brian M. Lowinger, Esq., Spirer & Goldberg, P.C.
For the District of Columbia Public Schools: Erika L. Pierson, Esq., Deputy General Counsel, and
Aaron E. Price, Sr., Esq., Attorney-Advisor.

      Opinion by Chief Administrative Judge Jonathan D. Zischkau, with Administrative Judge
Warren J. Nash, concurring.

                                             OPINION
                                     LexisNexis Filing ID 12431107

        Systems Assessment & Research, Inc. (“SAR”), protests the award of a contract to Columbus
Educational Services, LLC, as a special education services provider who would provide a variety of
special education personnel to assist the District of Columbia Public Schools (“DCPS”) in the
implementation of a consent decree entered in the federal class action lawsuit Blackman v. District of
Columbia, et al., 97-CV-1629 (D.D.C.) (“Blackman consent decree”). Columbus had the highest
evaluated proposal, and SAR was scored a distant second. Although the evaluation record is poorly
documented before us, perhaps because SAR did not frame its pro se protest particularly well, we
conclude that the protest should be dismissed because the federal court in Blackman exempted the
District of Columbia from the Procurement Practices Act for procurements implementing the Blackman
consent decree, and the procurement at issue clearly is meant to implement the consent decree.
Accordingly, we dismiss the protest.

                                         BACKGROUND

         On April 13, 2006, DCPS’s Office of Contracts and Acquisitions (“OCA”) issued Solicitation
No. GAGA-2006-R-0176 for the procurement of special education instructional and related services to
assist in the implementation of the Blackman consent decree. (Agency Report (“AR”) Exs. 1, 10). The
special education personnel to be provided included physical therapists, occupational therapists,
psychologists, speech language pathologists, master social workers, special education teachers, a
project coordinator, and a project director.

        On April 14, 2006, the Blackman court entered an order providing in pertinent part: “Ordered
that pending final approval of the Consent Decree, in order to implement the preliminary approved
Consent Decree, the [District of Columbia Government is] not bound by the D.C. Procurement
Practices Act or any other District or federal law relating to procurement, or any regulations
thereunder.” (AR Ex. 9).
                                             -2-                                SAR, Inc., CAB No. P-0738




         The closing date for proposals was April 21, 2006. Five proposals were timely received. OCA
conducted an initial screening of the proposals, determining that only three offers were within the
competitive range: (1) Tai Pedro & Associates, (2) SAR, and (3) Columbus. On May 12, 2006, OCA
began negotiations with these offerors. After negotiations had concluded, OCA requested best and final
offers (“BAFOs”). The BAFOs were evaluated by a panel of agency personnel knowledgeable about
special education, special education related services, and special education services providers. The
panel ultimately selected Columbus for the award. The record, however, does not contain any
evaluation score sheets, consensus reports of the technical evaluation team, or the independent
evaluation and selection reports of the contracting officer. All the record contains are summary sheets
of the initial technical evaluations and BAFO evaluations, listing simply the total technical evaluation
scores of the evaluators which presumably were adopted by the contracting officer. (AR Exs. 6, 7).
The Agency Report states that the “[evaluation] panel ultimately selected Columbus for the award.”
(AR at 2).

        In its efforts to begin immediate implementation of the consent decree’s terms, OCA issued a
letter contract to Columbus on June 1, 2006, with instructions to begin performance. (AR at 2).
Subsequently, OCA conducted a debriefing with SAR to review its proposal and evaluation. During the
course of this debriefing, SAR was informed of the shortcomings in its proposal. On June 26, 2006, in
the midst of the awardee’s performance under the letter contract, SAR, pro se, filed the instant protest.
SAR asserts that DCPS: (1) eliminated the requirement for a resume and position description for the
project director position; (2) discounted the protester’s proposal for lack of a subcontracting plan; (3)
misread the SAR’s staffing ability; (4) unjustifiably credited Columbus with past performance
experience; and (5) failed to include in the solicitation a local business participation requirement.

        On June 30, 2006, the final consent decree was entered in the Blackman case, which provides in
part: “Under this Consent Decree, the [District of Columbia Government is] not bound by the D.C.
Procurement Practices Act, D.C. Code Section 2-301.01 et seq., any other District or federal law
relating to procurement, and any regulation thereunder.” (AR Ex. 10).

        DCPS filed its Agency Report on July 20, 2006, addressing each of the grounds raised by the
protest. On July 27, SAR, represented by counsel, filed its comments on the Agency Report. In its
comments, SAR dropped all of the initial protest challenges except for the ones relating to the
evaluation based on the project director resume and the timing of staffing availability. SAR’s
comments raised, for the first time, the failure of the contracting officer and the technical evaluation
team to consider the evaluation factors, as reflected in the absence of records documenting how the
evaluators arrived at the summary scores presented in the protest record. DCPS did not respond to
SAR’s comments.

                                            DISCUSSION

       In its Agency Report, DCPS contends that it has fully complied with the District’s procurement
laws. Before reaching the merits, however, we must decide whether we properly exercise jurisdiction
pursuant to D.C. Code § 2-309.03(a)(1). DCPS states in the final sentence of its Agency Report, that
“the United States District Court in [Blackman] waived the procurement laws of the District of
Columbia as they apply to implementation of the [Blackman] Consent Decree.” SAR did not address
                                            -3-                                SAR, Inc., CAB No. P-0738


the consent decree exemption in its comments on the Agency Report.

        We have carefully reviewed the language of the April 14, 2006 court order and the final consent
decree of June 30, 2006, along with DCPS’s record of the special education services procurement at
issue. We conclude that the federal court order and consent decree in Blackman clearly exempt the
protested procurement from the Procurement Practices Act. Accordingly, we dismiss the protest for
lack of jurisdiction.

       SO ORDERED.

DATED: September 21, 2006                            /s/ Jonathan D. Zischkau
                                                     JONATHAN D. ZISCHKAU
                                                     Chief Administrative Judge

CONCURRING:


/s/ Warren J. Nash
WARREN J. NASH
Administrative Judge
