                      GOVERNMENT OF THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA
                            CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD


PROTEST OF:

CAPITOL PAVING OF D.C., INC.                            )
                                                        )        CAB No. P-0741
Under IFB No. POKA-2006-B-0090-LJ                       )

      For the Protester: Douglas A. Datt, Esq. For the District of Columbia Government: Howard
Schwartz, Esq., Senior Assistant Attorney General, and Talia S. Cohen, Esq., Assistant Attorney
General.

      Opinion by Chief Administrative Judge Jonathan D. Zischkau, with Administrative Judge
Warren J. Nash, concurring.

                                                OPINION
                                        LexisNexis Filing ID 12877636

         Capitol Paving of D.C., Inc., has protested the District’s solicitation for joint seal, slurry seal,
and bituminous surface treatment for various roadways in the District of Columbia, arguing that the
solicitation contains inconsistencies regarding how bids will be evaluated under the small, local, and
disadvantaged business enterprise (“SLDBE”) preference program as authorized by the Small, Local,
and Disadvantaged Business Enterprise Development and Assistance Act of 2005, D.C. Law 16-33
(“SLDBEDA Act”). Capitol Paving argues that while Section M of the solicitation defining the
evaluation criteria refers to preferences for “longtime resident businesses” (“LRBs”) and resident-
owned business enterprises, the “LSDBE Certification Package” found in Attachment J.7 of the
solicitation does not mention either preference. In addition, the preference percentage reductions found
in section M and Attachment J.7 also differ. Capitol Paving further argues that no award may be made
based on a LRB preference because (1) there are no regulations implementing the LRB certification
preference authorized by the SLDBEDA Act, and (2) the LRB certification as a matter of law cannot be
applicable to any contractor until the year 2012. Apparently because Capitol Paving currently does not
qualify for the 10 percent LRB certification preference but one of its competitors has recently been
certified as a LRB (Fort Myer Construction), Capitol Paving argues that employing the LRB preference
absent any waiver provision would eliminate competition and thus cannot be used in bid evaluations.

        We conclude that the first protest ground relating to the inconsistency between Solicitation
Section M and Attachment J.7 has been rendered moot because the District issued an amendment
removing Attachment J.7. Concerning the other protest grounds involving legal arguments challenging
the use of any LRB preferences in District procurements, we have recently rejected essentially the same
arguments in Capitol Paving of D.C., Inc., CAB No. P-0736, Oct. 12, 2006. Accordingly, we dismiss
the protest in part as moot and deny the remaining protest grounds.

                                            BACKGROUND

        On July 28, 2006, the Office of Contracting and Procurement (“OCP”) issued in the open market
IFB No. POKA-2006-B-0090-LJ with a bid opening date of August 31, 2006. OCP issued the IFB on
behalf of the District of Columbia Department of Transportation (“DDOT”), for a contractor to provide
                                              -2-                           Capitol Paving, CAB No. P-0741


joint seal, slurry seal, and bituminous surface treatment in order to repair cracks in various roadways in
the District. (Agency Report (“AR”) Ex. 1). Section J of the IFB lists seven attachments including
Attachment J.7, the “LSDBE Certification Package.” In accordance with the 2005 SLDBEDA Act,
Section M of the IFB provides preferences for small, local, disadvantaged, resident-owned, longtime
resident, and enterprise zone businesses. Specifically, Section M provides, in accordance with the
SLDBEDA Act, that a ten percent reduction is allowed for a certified longtime resident business.
Section M, entitled “Evaluation Factors”, contains the following relevant provisions:

       M.1.1 Preferences for Local Businesses, Disadvantaged Businesses, Resident-owned
       Businesses, Small Businesses, Longtime Resident Businesses, Longtime Resident
       Businesses, or Local Businesses with Principal Offices Located in an Enterprise Zone

       Under the provisions of the “Small, Local, and Disadvantaged Business Enterprise
       Development and Assistance Act of 2005” (the Act), Title II, Subtitle N, of the “Fiscal
       Year 2006 Budget Support Act of 2005”, D.C. Law 16-33, effective October 20, 2005,
       the District shall apply preferences in evaluating bids or proposals from businesses that
       are small, local, disadvantaged, resident-owned, longtime resident, or local with a
       principal office located in an enterprise zone of the District of Columbia.

       M.1 General Preferences

       For evaluation purposes, the allowable preferences under the Act for this procurement
       are as follows:

       ....

       M.1.1.3 Ten percent reduction in the bid price or the addition of ten points on a 100-
       point scale for a longtime resident business (LRB) certified by the SLBOC or the
       DSLBD, as applicable . . . .

(AR Ex. 1). Attachment J.7, the solicitation’s LSDBE Certification Package, contains information and
forms regarding the District’s preference program. (Protest, Ex. 2). The problem with the package is
that it appears to be seriously outdated, with some of the documents bearing revision dates in 1999, and
none of the documents reflecting the major statutory changes made by the 2005 SLDBEDA Act to the
preference program. On August 15, 2006, Capitol Paving filed the instant protest, pointing out that
there is no reference in Attachment J.7 to a certification for resident-owned or longtime resident
businesses.

       On August 21, 2006, OCP issued Amendment No. 2, which deleted Attachment J.7 of the IFB.
(AR Ex. 1). On August 29, 2006, OCP issued Amendment 3, which extended the bid opening date to
January 10, 2007. The District filed its Agency Report on September 5, Capitol Paving filed comments
on September 11, and the District filed a reply on September 19, 2006.

                                            DISCUSSION

       We exercise jurisdiction pursuant to D.C. Code § 2-309.03(a)(1).
                                              -3-                           Capitol Paving, CAB No. P-0741




        In response to Capitol Paving’s first protest ground alleging inconsistencies between Section M
and Attachment J.7, the District issued Amendment No. 2 deleting in its entirety Attachment J.7 which
contained the outdated LSDBE preference program information package. Capitol Paving nevertheless
urges that this amendment does not moot the first protest ground because removing Attachment J.7
means that the solicitation no longer provides preference program information and certification and
waiver application forms to prospective bidders. Capitol Paving’s argument is without merit. The
package is no more than an informational aid to bidders and its elimination does not render the
solicitation defective in any respect. Section M provides the evaluation criteria regarding the District’s
preference program and that content is derived directly from the SLDBEDA Act. Bidders can obtain
information and forms from the Small, Local Business Opportunity Commission (“SLBOC”) or its
supporting Department of Small and Local Business Development. Accordingly, we dismiss as moot
Capitol Paving’s first protest ground.

        Capitol Paving next argues that no award may be made under the challenged solicitation based
on a LRB preference because (1) there are no regulations implementing the LRB certification
preference authorized by the SLDBEDA Act, and (2) the LRB certification as a matter of law cannot be
applicable to any contractor until the year 2012. Apparently because Capitol Paving currently does not
qualify for the 10 percent LRB certification preference but one of its competitors has recently been
certified as an LRB, Capitol Paving argues that applying the LRB preference absent any waiver
provision would eliminate competition and thus cannot be used in this procurement.

        We recently rejected similar arguments in Capitol Paving of D.C., Inc., CAB No. P-0736, Oct.
12, 2006, where Capitol Paving challenged OCP’s applying a 10 percent preference to Fort Myer
Construction based on a longtime resident business certification issued by the SLBOC to Fort Myer.
We sustained the contracting officer’s determination to evaluate Fort Myer’s bid using the LRB
preference. Although we certainly look forward to the Mayor’s issuance of revised regulations to
implement the SLDBEDA Act and to replace various regulations that are obsolete, we cannot conclude
that the current solicitation, in providing preferences pursuant to the SLDBEDA Act, violates the law.
Accordingly, we deny Capitol Paving’s other grounds for protest.

       SO ORDERED.

DATED: November 9, 2006                                /s/ Jonathan D. Zischkau
                                                       JONATHAN D. ZISCHKAU
                                                       Chief Administrative Judge

CONCURRING:

/s/ Warren J. Nash
WARREN J. NASH
Administrative Judge
