                     GOVERNMENT OF THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA
                           CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD



PROTEST OF:

CORRECTIONAL MEDICAL CARE, INC.                       )
                                                      )    CAB No. P-0722
Under Solicitation No. DCFL-2005-R-0002               )

      For the Protester, Mr. Emre Umar, pro se. For the District of Columbia Government: Howard
Schwartz, Esq., Talia S. Cohen, Esq., Assistant Attorneys General, D.C.

      Opinion by Chief Administrative Judge Jonathan D. Zischkau, with Administrative Judge
Warren J. Nash, concurring.

                                 OPINION DENYING PROTEST
                                      LexisNexis Filing ID 10839183

       Correctional Medical Care, Inc. (“CMC”), has protested the Department of Correction’s
cancellation of a solicitation for a multi-year contract for comprehensive medical and mental health
services within the District’s detention facilities. CMC also challenges the award of a sole source
contract in connection with the cancellation to the incumbent contractor, CCHPS. The District filed an
Agency Report asserting that its decisions to cancel and award a sole source contract were reasonable
because of the agency’s need to substantially revise the statement of work and need for services to be
provided pending procurement of expanded services through a new solicitation. CMC has not
responded to the Agency Report and thus is deemed to concede the merits of the case. On the
unrebutted record presented by the District, we find a reasonable basis for the cancellation and
temporary sole source award, although we believe the agency could have competed its temporary
requirements without resorting to a sole source award. We deny the protest.

                                          BACKGROUND

        On February 11, 2005, the District issued Request for Proposals No. DFCL-2005-R-0002
(“RFP”) on behalf of the Department of Corrections (“DOC”) for a three-year multi-year requirements
contract for a contractor to provide within the District’s Central Detention Facility and Correctional
Treatment Facility (“detention facilities”) comprehensive medical and mental health services. (Agency
Report (“AR”) at 2; AR Ex. 1). The RFP was limited to providing “internal” health care services, i.e.,
health care services provided by health care providers to inmates within the DOC detention facilities.
The incumbent provider for internal health care services was the Center for Correctional Health and
Policy Studies, Inc. (“CCHPS”). “External” health care services, i.e., health care services provided to
inmates who must leave the detention facilities to receive health care, are currently provided by the
Alliance Contract primarily at Greater Southeast Community Hospital. (AR at 2, n.2). On the RFP’s
closing date of April 1, 2005, the District received proposals from the following four offerors: CMC,
Atlantic Health Services, Inc., CCHPS, and League Medical Concepts. (AR Ex. 3). The contracting
officer determined that CMC and CCHPS were in the competitive range. (AR Ex. 3). On May 20,
2005, the contracting officer held discussions with CMC and CCHPS and issued requests for BAFOs
from both CMC and CCHPS. (AR Exs. 2 and 3). Thereafter, the contracting officer recommended
                                              -2-                Correctional Medical Care, CAB No. P-0722


award to CMC since CMC had the highest technical score and offered the lowest price, pending
determination of CMC’s responsibility and certification of the availability of funding. (AR Exs. 2 and
3). However, two issues arose that required the District to reconsider the award of the multi-year
contract under the RFP. The first issue was the unavailability of funding needed to make an award.
(AR Ex. 3). The second issue was the change in the agency’s minimum needs to consolidate the scope
of work to include both external and internal health care for the Corrections population.

        Faced with these two issues, on August 15, 2005, the District requested an extension of the
offerors’ proposals until December 31, 2005, and also prepared for continuity of services in the event
that the District decided to revise its minimum needs. (AR Ex. 3). The contracting agency did not
inform CMC of these issues in its August 15, 2005 communication. By Determination and Findings for
Sole Source, dated August 19, 2005, the Interim Chief Procurement Officer (“CPO”) determined that in
order to continue to provide medical and mental services to DOC inmates without interruption while the
District revised its minimum needs, analyzed the cost effect, and prepared, issued and awarded a new
multi-year contract, an interim one year sole source contract with the incumbent contractor, CCHPS,
was justified. On September 30, 2005, the District issued CCHPS a one-year contract, No. DCFL-
2005-D-0044, for the period of October 1, 2005, through September 30, 2006, to continue to provide
internal comprehensive medical and mental health services at the District’s detention facilities. (AR Ex.
7). The contracting agency did not timely inform CMC of the sole source award to CCHPS.

        By email dated November 18, 2005, the Deputy Mayor for Public Safety and Justice
recommended that the CPO cancel the RFP so that the scope of work could be substantially changed.
(AR Ex. 5). On December 2, 2005, the CPO signed the determination and findings to cancel the RFP.
(AR Ex. 4). The CPO determined that it was in the best interest of the District to cancel the RFP so that
the RFP’s scope of work could be substantially changed. Since another ongoing contract for external
health services is scheduled to expire on May 31, 2006, the CPO agreed that it was in the District’s best
interest to combine into one solicitation both the internal and external health services and “seek one
vendor or a coalition of vendors who would provide and coordinate all health care for the Corrections
population.” (AR at 4; AR Ex. 4).

        On December 8, 2005, the District notified CMC of its determination to cancel the RFP.
(Protest). On December 16, 2005, CMC filed its protest. The District filed an Agency Report on
January 9, 2006. CMC has not responded to the Agency Report.

                                            DISCUSSION

               We exercise jurisdiction pursuant to D.C. Code § 2-309.03(a)(1). Our Board rules
provide in pertinent part:

       307.3 Failure of the protester to file comments, or to file a statement requesting that the
       case be decided on the existing record, or to request an extension of time for filing, shall
       result in closing the record of the case and may result in dismissal of the protest.

       307.4 When a protester fails to file comments on an Agency Report, factual allegations
       in the Agency Report’s statement of facts not otherwise contradicted by the protest, or
       the documents in the record, may be treated by the Board as conceded.
                                              -3-                Correctional Medical Care, CAB No. P-0722




        We treat as conceded the District’s statement of facts in its Agency Report regarding the bases
for the determination to cancel the RFP and to award a sole source interim contract to CCHPS. Our
standard of review of a cancellation determination is well settled. A request for proposals may be
cancelled only if the CPO determines in writing that the action is taken in the best interest of the
District government and there is a reasonable basis for cancellation. D.C. Code § 2-303.07 (2001);
JHARBO Limited, Inc., CAB No. P-0527, Jan. 16, 1998, 45 D.C. Reg. 8701, 8703; Singleton Electric
Co., CAB No. P-0411, Nov. 15, 1994, 42 D.C. Reg. 4888, 4893. A sole source procurement may be
used only under the standards provided in D.C. Code § 2-303.05 (2001). Because CMC has conceded
the factual bases for the District’s actions, we sustain the determinations to cancel the RFP and to award
the sole source interim contract.

        We believe the contracting agency should have notified CMC of the funding issue and change in
minimum needs at the time it requested the extension of CMC’s offer. In addition, we do not
understand why the contracting agency was unable to compete the 1-year interim contract requirements
and chose rather to issue a sole source award to CCHPS. Here, the contracting agency had identified
two viable providers as a result of the RFP, CMC and CCHPS, and with regard to the RFP, CMC had
the highest technical score and lowest price. In any event, once the agency made the sole source award
to CCHPS, it promptly should have advised CMC of the sole source award because it clearly related to
the pending solicitation and covered the same services.

       Based on the record presented to us, we deny CMC’s protest.

       SO ORDERED.


DATED: March 20, 2006                                  /s/ Jonathan D. Zischkau
                                                       JONATHAN D. ZISCHKAU
                                                       Chief Administrative Judge


CONCURRING:



/s/ Warren J. Nash
WARREN J. NASH
Administrative Judge
