               DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD


PROTEST OF:

SECURUS TECHNOLOGIES                                    )
                                                        )              CAB No. P-0784
Under Solicitation No. DCTO-2008-B-0217                 )


       For the Protester, SECURUS Technologies: Mr. John Viola, pro se. For the District of
Columbia Government: Howard Schwartz, Esq., Senior Assistant Attorney General, and Robert
Schildkraut, Esq., Assistant Attorney General.

      Opinion by Chief Administrative Judge Jonathan D. Zischkau, with Administrative Judge
Warren J. Nash, concurring.

                                             OPINION
                                           Filing ID 23001117


        SECURUS Technologies has protested the District’s solicitation for a contractor to provide
inmate telephone services at the District of Columbia Department of Corrections. SECURUS argues
that the inclusion of video-visitation systems with the inmate telephone services required by the
solicitation will add unnecessary costs to each offeror's proposal, causing the offerors to inflate the
rates that parties pay for calls. Further, SECURUS argues that the RFP is potentially in conflict with
D.C. Law 13-280 which prohibits the imposition of commissions or surcharges on inmate telephone
service rates. Finally, SECURUS contends that the weight the District assigned to the price factor in
its evaluation criteria is inconsistent with D.C. Law 13-280. Because we conclude that the District’s
decision to include video-visitation systems is neither unreasonable, irrational, nor contrary to D.C.
Law 13-280, and that the solicitation evaluation weightings also do not violate D.C. Law 13-280, we
deny the protest.

                                         BACKGROUND

        On June 25, 2008, the District's Office of Contracting and Procurement (“OCP”) issued RFP
No. DCTO-2008-R-0217 on behalf of the Department of Corrections (“DOC”) for a contractor to
provide inmate telephone services at the District of Columbia Department of Corrections Detention
Facility (“CDF”). (Agency Report (“AR”) Ex. 1). The contractor would be responsible for
providing labor, materials, and equipment necessary to furnish, install, and maintain a coinless,
collect call, commissary account debit-type telephone system appropriate for inmate use. (AR Ex. 1,
RFP § 3.C). The RFP stated that all proposals had to be submitted by July 24, 2008.

        OCP issued Amendment 1 to the RFP on July 21, 2008. (AR Ex. 1). This amendment
provided answers to various questions submitted by prospective offerors and extended the closing
date of the RFP until August 14, 2008. OCP issued Amendment 2 to the RFP on July 29, 2008.
(AR Ex. 1). Amendment 2 changed section C.3.12 of the RFP to require that 3 telephones on each
housing unit have video capability to offer inmates video conferencing/video-visitation access, and
that the contractor provide 54 video-visitation terminals at the CDF visitor center for video
                                                -2-             SECURUS Technologies, CAB No. P-0784

conferencing/video-visitation use. (AR Ex. 1). Amendment 3 to the RFP was also issued on August
20, 2008. Amendment 3 answered a question regarding whether the telephones in each unit would
also be able to function as video visitation phones. Amendment 4 to the RFP was issued on
September 9, 2008. This amendment addressed additional questions from prospective offerors, and
extended the closing date of the RFP until September 26, 2008. (AR Ex. 1).

        On September 9, 2008, SECURUS filed a protest with the Board. The basis of the protest is
that: (1) the inclusion of video-visitation phones in the RFP was improper and in conflict with D.C.
Law 13-280, and (2) the evaluation criteria for price established too low a weight (20 points out of
112) relative to the weight for the technical criteria, contrary to D.C. Law 13-280.

        SECURUS requests that the RFP be modified to eliminate the video-visitation component,
and that the RFP be amended so that the price factor accounts for at least 50 percent of the final
scoring in each offeror's proposal in order to provide a scoring mechanism that will assure an award
that complies with DC Law 13-280. On September 23, 2008 OCP issued Amendment 5 to the RFP
extending the closing date of the RFP until October 10, 2008. (AR Ex. 1). On September 29, 2008,
the District filed its agency report. Exhibit 2 of the District’s agency report, a September 25, 2008,
declaration of Thomas Hoey, Director of the Office of Management Information and Technology
Services for the DOC, responds to the protest grounds as follows:

       6.       The use of video visitation phones is considered best practice in the
       correctional field today. With video visitation phones inmates can do visits right
       from the housing unit; there is no need for escorts and the security strength on the
       housing unit can be maintained rather than compromised.
       7.       In addition, corrections agencies are setting up visitation centers outside the
       facility, so visitors don’t have to pass through the walls to talk to the inmate. This
       saves staff, and most importantly, eliminates contraband from the facility. So, there
       is an overriding public safety imperative to use video visitation phones.
       8.       Video visitation will greatly expand opportunities for inmates to visit with
       friends and family, with access potentially available during all out of cell time seven
       days per week. Research has shown that frequent social contacts can lower stress
       and tension levels within the inmate population. This in turn contributes to greater
       safety and security for inmates and staff alike.
       9.       The District is not charging a surcharge, commission, or other financial
       imposition that is in addition to legally established rates for local or long-distance
       telephone service.
       10.      The DOC is seeking to obtain quality service for the least cost to the
       individual party paying for the telephone call by an inmate. In order to balance the
       need for quality service and low price the District made a determination that (20)
       twenty points out of a maximum total of one hundred twelve (112) points used in
       evaluating each proposal be based upon the offeror’s total price for the base and
       option years.
       11.      Access to phones and video visitation capability under DOC’s latest initiative
       is very important to the inmate population. DOC seeks to avoid frequent and/or
       prolonged delays in access caused by inferior quality equipment or poor service
       responsiveness. The audio and visual quality of the connection is important as well.
                                                -3-             SECURUS Technologies, CAB No. P-0784

       Problems in these areas can lead to higher tension levels, verbal conflicts, assaults
       and even multi inmate disturbances. Enormous security risks are at stake in the jail’s
       maximum security environment.

        In a September 30, 2008 declaration (Exhibit 1 of the District’s response to SECURUS’
comments on the agency report), Mr. Hoey expands upon his earlier declaration and responds to the
allegation that the video-visitation system should have been separately procured by DOC:

       It would not be realistic, nor in the District’s best interests, both technically and
       economically, to conduct two separate procurements. The integrated video-
       visitation/telephone system originally specified is preferred and is dependent upon
       the technology from the inmate telephone service to function. The video-visitation
       system is not a stand alone product that will work independently of the inmate
       telephone system. The system that is being procured is in fact one piece of
       equipment. Further, it is important that the video-visitation/inmate telephone system
       be awarded to the same vendor in order to increase operational effectiveness. Since
       the systems are so intertwined, it is essential that implementation and administration
       of the systems be handled by one party because of economies that can be achieved
       and the government’s desire to avoid needless disruption of inmate housing units.
       Multiple contractors working in each of the housing units would place a greater
       strain on security personnel which could create an unsafe environment for inmates
       and personnel. Moreover, inmates, their families, and taxpayers are spared the total
       overhead cost associated with separate procurements, which is considerable. The
       additional cost for two procurements could easily exceed $100,000.

(District’s October 31 Response, Ex. 1 ¶ 6.).

                                           DISCUSSION

       We exercise jurisdiction pursuant to D.C. Code § 2-309.03(a)(1).

        SECURUS argues that the inclusion of video-visitation phones in the inmate telephone
services RFP will add unnecessary costs to each offeror's proposal, causing the offerors to inflate the
rates that inmates and called parties pay for collect and debit calls. Further, SECURUS argues that
the RFP is potentially in conflict with D.C. Law 13-280 which prohibits the imposition of
commissions or surcharges on inmate telephone service rates.

        SECURUS' argument that the video-visitation phones are unnecessary to achieve the
District's desired goals raises the question of the District's determination of its minimum needs for
this procurement. SECURUS faces a difficult burden. The District has the primary responsibility
for determining its minimum needs and the method of accommodating them. See In re Prison
Health Services, Inc., CAB No. P-0610 (reconsideration), June 22, 2000, 48 D.C. Reg. 1556, 1557.
We have recognized that government procurement officials, since they are the ones most familiar
with the conditions under which supplies, equipment, or services have been used in the past and how
they are to be used in the future, are generally in the best position to know the government's actual
needs. Consequently, we will not question an agency's determination of its actual minimum needs
                                                 -4-              SECURUS Technologies, CAB No. P-0784

unless there is a clear showing that the determination has no reasonable basis. See Mell, Brownell &
Baker, CAB No. P-0615, Jan. 18, 2001, 49 D.C. Reg. 3321, 3324-25; Beretta U.S.A. Corp., CAB
Nos. P-0144, P-0177, Aug. 23, 1990, 38 D.C. Reg. 3098, 3120-3121; G. Koprowski, B-400215, Aug.
12, 2008, 2008 U.S. Comp. Gen. LEXIS 150; Ray Service Company, B-217218, May 22,1985, 85-1
CPD ¶ 582.

        We conclude that the factual record reasonably supports the contracting agency’s need to
include video-visitation phones in the solicitation. DOC's Director of Management Information and
Technology Services explains in his declaration that video-visitation phones provide important
security, safety, and cost benefits for the inmate phone service: (1) the video-visitation phones are
considered best practice in the correctional field today, (2) with video-visitation phones, inmates can
conduct visits right from the housing unit, and there is no need for escorts and the security strength
of the housing unit can be maintained rather than compromised, (3) by setting up a visitation center
outside the facility, visitors will not have to enter the secure prison facility to talk to inmates, thus
saving staff and eliminating the potential transfer of contraband, and (4) video visitation will greatly
expand opportunities for inmates to visit with family and friends, with access potentially available
during all out-of-cell time, seven days per week and research has shown that frequent social contacts
can lower stress and tension levels within the inmate population. (AR Ex. 2). SECURUS has made
no effective showing to the contrary.

        We see no basis for SECURUS’ other argument that including the video-visitation system
would result in a 60 percent commission on calling rates, in conflict with D.C. Law 13-280, which
regulates telephone charges in correctional institutions. D.C. Law 13-280 was codified as D.C. Code
§ 24-263.01 (Telephone charges in penal or correctional institutions), § 24-263.02 (Prohibited
charges in government contracts), and § 24-263.04 (Operator-assisted calls). The relevant language
regarding this issue can be found in D.C. Code §§ 24-263.01 and 24-263.02:

        § 24-263.01. Telephone charges in penal or correctional institutions,

        (a) Notwithstanding any other District of Columbia law, no telephone service
        provider shall charge a customer a rate for operator-assisted calls made from a penal
        or correctional institution in the District of Columbia in excess of the maximum rate
        determined by the Public Service Commission of the District of Columbia.

        (b) No penal or correctional institution in the District of Columbia shall charge a
        surcharge, commission, or other financial imposition that is in addition to legally
        established rates for local or long-distance telephone service.

        § 24-263.02. Prohibited charges in government contracts.

        In any contract to which the District of Columbia is a party that is for the holding or
        incarceration of persons charged or convicted in the Superior Court of the District of
        Columbia, such contract shall prohibit surcharges, commissions, or other financial
        impositions that are in addition to the legally established rates for calls made by any
        inmate subject to the contract. The District of Columbia government shall seek to
        obtain quality service for the least cost to the individual party paying for the
                                                 -5-              SECURUS Technologies, CAB No. P-0784

        telephone call by an inmate subject to the contract.

        There is no evidence that the solicitation requires charging “a customer a rate for operator-
assisted calls made from a penal or correctional institution in the District in excess of the maximum
rate determined by the Public Service Commission of the District.” In addition, there is no evidence
that the solicitation at issue here will cause the District to charge a “surcharge, commission, or other
financial imposition that is in addition to legally established rates for local or long-distance
telephone service.” Under section 24-263.02, as we read it, the contract must affirmatively prohibit
the charging of surcharges and commissions beyond the legally established rates. SECURUS has
not persuaded us that the District’s requirement for the video-visitation system violates the
prohibition on assessing improper surcharges or commissions.

         SECURUS further argues that the weight the District assigned to the price factor in its
evaluation criteria is inconsistent with D.C. Law 13-280. The RFP's price criterion provides that
each offeror's proposal would be scored and ranked based upon a maximum112 points. (AR Ex. 1).
An offeror can receive a maximum of 80 points for its technical proposal, a maximum of 20 points
for its price proposal, and a maximum of 12 preference points. (AR Ex. 1). The relevant language
in § 24-263.02 states: “The District of Columbia government shall seek to obtain quality service for
the least cost to the individual party paying for the telephone call by an inmate subject to the
contract.” SECURUS contends that the RFP should have established a minimum of 50 percent of
the offeror's overall evaluation score for the price criterion. Clearly, the statute does not require any
specific percentages for price or technical evaluation criteria in a District solicitation. We conclude
that the stated evaluation criteria do not violate D.C. Law 13-280. SECURUS has not shown that
the agency’s allocation of technical and price evaluation points violates any other District laws. The
DOC Director of Office of Management Information and Technology Services explains in his
declaration that: “DOC seeks to avoid frequent and/or prolonged delays in access caused by inferior
quality equipment or poor service responsiveness. The audio and visual quality of the connection is
important as well. Problems in these areas can lead to higher tension levels, verbal conflicts,
assaults and even multi inmate disturbances. Enormous liability risks are at stake in the jail's
maximum security environment.” (AR Ex. 2). Under our deferential standard of review of the
business judgments of agency officials regarding the establishment of evaluation criteria and the
allocation of points among those criteria, we find that the criteria are neither unreasonable nor
irrational.

        In its comments on the District’s agency report, SECURUS argues that the District should
not bundle two distinct systems, i.e., the inmate telephone system and the video-visitation system, in
the same procurement. We agree with the District that this argument is not supported by the facts.
According to the DOC, the system being procured is really one integrated system, not two separate
systems and it would not be in the best interest of the District, both technically and economically, to
conduct two separate procurements. The DOC states that the video-visitation system is dependent
upon the technology from the inmate telephone service to function, the video-visitation system is not
a stand alone product that will work independently of the inmate telephone system, the system that is
being procured is in fact one piece of equipment, and it is important that the video-visitation system
and inmate telephone system be awarded to the same vendor in order that administration of the
systems be handled by one vendor because of economies that can be achieved and the District's
desire to avoid needless disruption to inmate housing units. (Response, Ex. 1). We find that the
                                                -6-             SECURUS Technologies, CAB No. P-0784

District has justified its procuring the video-visitation system and inmate telephone service together
since the District has shown that the systems are dependent on each other, and technical and
financial economies will be achieved by not separately procuring the systems. See Nautical
Engineering, Inc., B- 309955, Nov. 7, 2007, 2007 CPD ¶ 204; Boehringer Ingelheim Pharm., Inc.,
B-294944.3, B-295430, Feb. 2, 2005, 2005 CPD ¶ 32.

        We have considered each of the grounds raised by SECURUS but find that the solicitation
violates no District law. Accordingly, we deny the protest.

       SO ORDERED.

DATED: December 19, 2008                              /s/ Jonathan D. Zischkau
                                                      JONATHAN D. ZISCHKAU
                                                      Chief Administrative Judge


CONCURRING:


/s/ Warren J. Nash
WARREN J. NASH
Administrative Judge
