                     GOVERNMENT OF THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA
                          CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD

PROTEST OF:

VISTA CONTRACTING, INC.                              )
                                                     )           CAB No. P-0726
Under IFB NO. POFA-2005-B-0040-BJ                    )

        For the Appellant Vista Contracting, Inc.: Thomas O. Mason, Esq., and Francis
E. Purcell, Jr., Esq., Williams Mullen. For the District of Columbia: Howard Schwartz,
Esq., and Talia S. Cohen, Esq., Office of the Attorney General.

       Opinion by Administrative Judge Warren J. Nash, with Chief Administrative
Judge Jonathan D. Zischkau, concurring.

                                        OPINION
                               (LexisNexis Filing ID 11324690)

        Vista Contracting, Inc. (“Vista”) protests the award of a contract to Skanska USA
Building, Inc. (“Skanska”), for the construction of an indoor firing range at 3665 Blue
Plains Drive, S.W., Washington, D.C., for the Metropolitan Police Department (“MPD”).
Vista alleges that its proposal was technically acceptable and lower priced, and that the
contracting officer improperly determined that Vista failed to meet the solicitation’s
special standards of responsibility. The District responds that it properly awarded the
contract to Skanska. We conclude that Vista has not shown error in the District’s
determination of Vista’s non-responsibility and accordingly we deny the protest.

                                    BACKGROUND

       On August 25, 2005, the District of Columbia Office of Contracting and
Procurement (“OCP”), on behalf of the MPD, issued IFB POFA-2005-B-0040-BJ for
construction of an indoor firing range. (Agency Report (“AR”) Ex. 1). Section L.26.1 of
the IFB required the contractor and key personnel to show that they had knowledge of
and experience in the construction of a walk-down firing range that would be configured
without shooting booths but with fixed pneumatic firing systems. Section L.26.1
contains the following language:

       The Contractor, including key personnel assigned to perform the work on
       the indoor firing range, must demonstrate knowledge of and experience in
       the construction of a walk-down firing range that is configured without
       shooting booths but includes fixed pneumatic target systems. The bidder
       shall provide the following information with its bid for each similar firing
       range constructed:

              a.      Time Period of the construction;
              b.      Name and location of range;
                                            2
                                                          Vista Contracting, Inc., CAB No. P-0726


              c.      Name of contact person; and
              d.      Phone number of contact person.

       The District will not find responsible any bidder that does not provide,
       with its bid or within 5 calendar days of request by the Contracting
       Officer, information adequate to determine its compliance with the stated
       Special Standards of Responsibility.

(AR Ex. 1). By amendment, the District extended the closing date of the IFB to October
3, 2005. (AR Ex. 1). Six bidders submitted bids. (AR Ex. 11). According to the
contracting officer, only Skanska submitted adequate information that allowed the
District to determine that Skanska had complied with Section L.26.1. (AR Ex. 11).

       By letter dated October 27, 2005, OCP sent letters to four of the remaining
bidders requesting information to determine whether those bidders complied with Section
L.26.1. (AR Exs. 5, 6). Only Vista responded to the District’s request, by letter dated
November 1, 2005. (AR Ex. 7). Vista stated that it would employ a reputable and
experienced Firing Range Manufacturer. (AR Ex. 7). In the letter, Vista stated:

              We believe the following projects demonstrate our experience in
       the construction of Firing Ranges:

       1.     FBI – Fire Range, 900 Penn Ave., NW, (1993); Contact: Tony
              Wildgruber, 202-436-8050. Project Description: Remove 9 lane
              Firing Range and install new range including, but not limited to
              replacement of bullet trap system, epoxy flooring, acoustical
              baffles.

       2.     FBI – HEPA Exhaust Filter for Small Pistol Range, 900 Penn
              Ave., NW; (1994); Contract: Tony Wildgruber, 202-436-8050.
              Project Description: Improve exhaust system for Pistol Range.

       3.     FBI – Ballistic Wall for Outdoor Firing range; (1992); Contact:
              Ron Chiodi, 202-324-2459 or Jane Brown, 202-324-2458. Project
              Description: Install ballistic wall 500 feet long, 12 feet high,
              including but not limited to concrete footers, steel beams, timber,
              paint, steel plates, etc.

       On November 4, 2005, Eric Coard, Senior Executive Director, Corporate Support,
Metropolitan Police Department, evaluated Vista’s response and concluded that the
information presented by Vista did not “adequately relate to Vista’s involvement or
experience in constructing walk down firing ranges.” (AR Ex. 8). Bobby Jones, OCP’s
contract specialist, attempted to verify the information set forth in Vista’s November 1,
2005 letter. (AR Ex. 13). OCP provided the following information in its Verification of
References document:
                                             3
                                                           Vista Contracting, Inc., CAB No. P-0726


       The Contract Specialist, Bobby Jones called Mr. Tony Wildgruber
       (reference) at FBI, 900 Pennsylvania Ave. on several occasions without
       success. However, after calling the second reference, Mr. Ron Chiodi, it
       was learned that Vista had constructed a ballistic wall for an outdoor firing
       range. He had no knowledge of Vista’s participation in the construction of
       a complete firing range and that the range, 900 Pennsylvania Ave. was
       constructed by Specialty Construction Management (SCM) approximately
       two years ago. Contacted SCM and spoke with Monty, 202-832-7250.
       Monty had no record of Vista’s involvement with the construction of that
       range.

       On 11/10/05, Mr. Tony Wildgruber was contacted. He stated that the
       firing range in question was renovated two years ago by SCM, but that the
       original range was built by Vista. That particular range is considerably
       smaller at 9-point vs. the 15-point range to be built as a replacement for
       the current MPD range at the Police Training Academy. Mr. Wildgruber
       did not provide confirmation that the FBI range was a walk-down range
       but stated that it may be possible to use as such.

       The references’ information received by MPD differs from the
       information received by OCP. In order to resolve the issue, OCP
       requested permission to visit and observe the FBI’s range. For some
       reason, the FBI refused permission for OCP to visit their facility. For
       further information, Mr. Wildgruber (electrical engineer) referred me to
       the Director of Range Construction/Maintenance. The Director of
       construction/maintenance is Mr. Juan Inga. The Contract Specialist
       contacted Mr. Inga on 11/15/05 to follow up on the previous conversation
       he had with MPD representative, Mr. Eric Coard concerning the builder of
       their firing range. Mr. Inga confirmed that the FBI’s firing range was
       upgraded two years ago by SCM from a Caswell system to a Snail lead
       abatement system and that Vista may have been the firm who constructed
       the range over 15 years ago. The firing range supposedly constructed by
       Vista at the FBI facility on Penn. Ave is an 8 lane indoor range and not
       specifically a walk-down range.

       On November 16, 2005, Mr. Jones and the assistant commodity manager
concluded that Vista “has not demonstrated the knowledge of and experience with
constructing a walk-down firing range as specified in Section L.26.1 of the solicitation.”
(AR Ex. 13).

        On November 21, 2005, the Deputy Mayor for Operations and Chief Procurement
Officer determined that only Skanska’s bid complied with the requirements set forth in
Section L.26.1, since only Skanska had previous experience in constructing a walk-down
firing range. (AR Ex. 9). The CPO determined that Vista was not responsible because
Vista’s references did not confirm that Vista had constructed a walk-down indoor firing
range. (AR Ex. 9).
                                             4
                                                            Vista Contracting, Inc., CAB No. P-0726



       On January 23, 2006, the District awarded to Skanska a contract for construction
of the walk-down indoor firing range. (AR Ex. 12). Vista filed this protest on February
8, 2006.

                                      DISCUSSION

        Vista asserts in its protest that the District should have awarded the contract to
Vista since Vista’s bid was technically acceptable and Vista’s price was lower than
Skanska’s price. The District responds that the District properly awarded the contract to
Skanska since the contracting officer reasonably determined that Skanska was the only
bidder that met the special standard of responsibility set forth in the IFB. We conclude
that the District properly awarded the contract to Skanska.

        The IFB required the bidder to show that it could perform the contract in
compliance with the special standards of responsibility set forth in Section L.26.1. The
District required bidders to demonstrate that they had the experience and expertise
needed to build the firing range set forth in the IFB. The IFB does not contain a
definition of the term “walk-down firing range.”1 Vista asserts that it has experience in
building the required range.

        The District’s contract specialist and MPD program personnel attempted to verify
Vista’s assertions regarding Vista’s experience in building walk-down firing ranges.
Bobby Jones, OCP’s contract specialist, attempted to verify the information set forth in
Vista’s November 1, 2005 letter. (AR Ex. 13). Vista provided three references, but only
the first reference dealt with a complete indoor range. (AR Ex. 7, 13). The vague
information provided by the FBI suggested that the FBI range was not expressly a “walk-
down firing range” but “it may be possible to use as such.” The FBI’s Director of
Construction Maintenance in a subsequent discussion with OCP’s contract specialist
stated only that Vista may have been the firm which constructed the FBI range
approximately 15 years ago, that the range is an 8 lane indoor range, and that it was not
specifically a walk-down firing range.

        Vista did not submit the required special responsibility information in its bid.
Vista had an opportunity to provide further information to show that it met the special
standards of responsibility. Vista was uniquely positioned to provide to the District
sufficient information that the District needed to verify whether Vista met the
requirements of Section L.26.1. Since the District could not verify Vista’s assertions
regarding its experience, and the FBI contacts tended to contradict that the first reference
met the requirements, we see no error in the District’s non-responsibility determination.
       1
            Vista did not object to the District’s assertion that the contract drawings set
forth an adequate description of the project, notwithstanding the fact that the IFB itself
did not explicitly define “walk-down firing range.” After reviewing the drawings, the
Board agrees that the drawings set forth an adequate description of the project and that
the District could properly determine whether a bidder had experience in building that
type of firing range.
                                           5
                                                         Vista Contracting, Inc., CAB No. P-0726



       Vista also argues that the District ignored the experience of Vista’s proposed
subcontractors. Although Vista proposed two possible alternate subcontractors to
perform work, Vista did not submit the information required by Section L.26.1 to
demonstrate that either prospective subcontractor possessed knowledge and experience
constructing the specified type of walk-down firing range.

        The contracting agency made reasonable efforts to verify Vista’s compliance with
the special standards of responsibility through repeated attempts to obtain information
from the FBI concerning Vista’s first reference. The information garnered from the FBI
representatives support the conclusion of the contracting officer that Vista had not
demonstrated “knowledge of and experience in the construction of a walk-down indoor
firing range that is configured without shooting booths but includes fixed pneumatic
target systems” as required by IFB Section L.26.1.

       We conclude that Vista has not shown that the contracting officer erred in
determining that Vista did not meet the special standards of responsibility set forth in
Section L.26.1. Accordingly, we deny the protest.

DATED: May 19, 2006                                /s/ Warren J. Nash
                                                   WARREN J. NASH
                                                   Administrative Judge

CONCURRING:

/s/ Jonathan D. Zischkau
JONATHAN D. ZISCHKAU
Chief Administrative Judge
