               DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD

PROTEST OF:
                                                       )
NATION CAPITAL BUILDERS, LLC                           )
                                                       )        CAB No. P-0761
Under IFB No. DCKA-2007-B-0082                         )

      For the Protester, Nation Capital Builders, LLC, Leonard A. White, Esq. For the
Government: Howard Schwartz, Esq., and Talia Sassoon Cohen, Esq., Assistant Attorneys
General.

       Opinion by Administrative Judge Warren J. Nash, with Chief Administrative Judge
Jonathan D. Zischkau, concurring.

                                            OPINION
                                         (Filing ID 17323071)

        Nation Capital Builders, LLC, (“NCB”) filed a protest on August 28, 2007, challenging
the District’s rejection of its bid for failing to submit a bid bond. NCB argues that it was not
required to submit a bid bond with its bid and that alternatively the contracting officer should
waive the bond requirement as a minor informality. On October 23, 2007, the District's Acting
Chief Procurement Officer ("CPO"), pursuant to D.C. Code § 2-309.08(c)(2), determined that the
District should proceed with contract performance while the protest is pending. On October 30,
2007, NCB filed a motion challenging the determination to proceed with performance under a
recently awarded contract. For the reasons discussed below, we conclude that the CPO's
determination should be sustained. We further determine that the solicitation required a bid
bond, NCB did not submit a bond with its bid, and that the contracting officer properly rejected
NCB’s bid as nonresponsive. Accordingly, we deny the protest.

                                        BACKGROUND

        On June 29, 2007, the Office of Contracts and Procurement issued solicitation IFB No.
DCKA-2007-B-0082 on behalf of the District Department of Transportation (“DDOT”)
requesting bids to provide preventative maintenance activities to rehabilitate and maintain
roadway and roadway assets, within the rights of way on the District’s portion of the National
Highway System. (Agency Report, Ex. 1). The bid documents set forth a contract base term of
one year with the possibility of four successive one-year options. Bids were submitted by
several prospective contractors, including NCB, on August 13, 2007. By letter dated August 15,
2007, the DDOT contracting officer informed NCB that DDOT declared NCB’s bid non-
responsive because NCB failed to submit a signed and completed bid bond. (Agency Report, Ex.
5). NCB protested the determination of non-responsiveness on August 28, 2007. Since the
protest was filed before award of the contract, an automatic stay of performance went into effect
pursuant to D.C. Code § 2-309.08(c)(1). By Determination and Findings (“D&F”) dated October
23, 2007, the Acting CPO determined that urgent and compelling circumstances that
significantly affect interests of the District would not permit waiting for the final decision of the
Board concerning the protest.
                                                -2-      Nation Capital Builders, LLC, CAB No. P-0761




        On October 30, 2007, the protester timely filed a Motion to Challenge the D&F alleging
that the D&F does not provide substantial evidence of urgent and compelling circumstances that
“significantly affect interests of the District.” (Motion at 1).

                                          DISCUSSION

        The solicitation at issue seeks a contractor to provide preventive maintenance activities to
rehabilitate and maintain roadway and roadway assets within the rights of way on the District’s
portion of the National Highway System. There is no question that providing for the
maintenance of the roadway and roadway assets is a compelling and urgent requirement of the
government. In the D&F, the CPO sets forth the District’s compelling need to proceed with
contract award. According to the CPO, because the District could potentially lose up to 60 days
of the construction season while it waited for a protest decision, and because waiting on a
decision could impair the District’s ability to repair city streets before winter, the District could
not wait to proceed with the preventative maintenance activities. The CPO clearly sets forth a
compelling need to proceed with preventative maintenance services. For purposes of lifting the
stay, once a compelling need for the services is shown, whether another contractor can also
perform is irrelevant. Whitman-Walker Clinic, Inc., CAB Nos. P-0672 and P-0674, July 25,
2003, 50 D.C. Reg. 7521. Accordingly, we deny NCB’s motion challenging the CPO's
determination to proceed with contract award.

        Regarding the merits of the protest, NCB alleges that it is now ready to submit a bid bond
and performance bond so that the District could award the contract to NCB. Although NCB’s
protest is not a model of clarity, NCB seems to argue that the solicitation did not require a bid
bond to be submitted with its bid. We assume that NCB is arguing that the District, by
improperly rejecting NCB’s bid, improperly removed NCB from consideration as the lowest
bidder for the procurement. The District responds that since the bid bond form was included in
the IFB, the procurement clearly required the bidder to furnish a bid bond at bid opening.

        NCB alleges that the bid bond form is ambiguous, and that the form allows the bidder to
produce a bid bond up to 90 days after bid opening. NCB further alleges that in any event, the
procurement regulations allow the contracting officer to accept a bid without a bid bond, if the
bid is in the best interests of the District, citing 27 DCMR § 2702.1(b). The District responds
that the language setting forth the bid bond period is not ambiguous, and that the bid bond form
requires a bid bond to remain in effect for 90 days after bid opening. Additionally, the District
responds that the contracting officer cannot waive the bid bond requirement unless the bid meets
the criteria set forth in 27 DCMR § 2702.1. Section 2702.1 provides that the bid meet the
requirements for a waiver under one of the other bid bond waiver exceptions of section 2702 and
that the waiver be in the best interests of the District.

        D.C. Code § 2-305.02(a)(1) provides that “[b]id security shall be required for all
competitive sealed bids and competitive sealed proposals for construction contracts when the
price is estimated by the Director to exceed $100,000.” In the IFB, the District set forth an
estimated price over $100,000, thereby requiring all bidders to submit a bid bond. D.C. Code §
2-305.02(c) further requires that the District reject a bid that does not include a bid bond when
                                               -3-      Nation Capital Builders, LLC, CAB No. P-0761



the IFB requires a bid bond. This Board has noted the well-settled doctrine that in deciding
whether a bond is defective, we must determine whether the surety would be bound to its surety
obligation by the bid bond as submitted. See MC Services, Inc., CAB No. P-0570, March 18,
1999, 46 D.C. Reg. 8582; HR General Maintenance Corp., CAB No. P-0557, February 2, 1999,
46 D.C. Reg. 8556. There is no question that the District required a bid bond in the IFB.
Likewise, 27 DCMR § 2702.1 is clear and unambiguous when it requires the contracting officer
to reject a bid when the bidder fails to comply with the bid security requirements. Therefore,
since NCB’s bid did not include a bid bond, and since NCB’s bid was not eligible for a waiver of
the bid bond requirement under any of the other subparts of section 2702, the contracting officer
properly determined that NCB’s bid was nonresponsive to the IFB.

        In the response to the Agency Report, NCB questioned whether sealed bids for
construction IDIQ type contracts require bid bonds at bid opening. NCB did not present this
ground of protest in its protest filing. The District responded by noting that the protester should
have sought clarification of this alleged impropriety in the IFB by filing a protest before bid
opening. D.C. Code § 2-309.08(b)(1) provides that “[a] protest based upon alleged improprieties
in a solicitation which are apparent prior to bid opening … shall be filed prior to bid opening
….” The District contends that this protest ground is untimely and should be dismissed. We
agree. Indeed, to the extent that NCB raises new protest grounds in its response to the Agency
Report, those grounds are untimely and are hereby dismissed.

      Since NCB did not provide a bid bond, the contracting officer properly rejected the bid.
Accordingly, we deny the protest.

       SO ORDERED.


November 20, 2007                                            /s/ Warren J. Nash
                                                             Administrative Judge


       /s/ Jonathan D. Zischkau
Chief Administrative Judge
