                            GOVERNMENT OF THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA
                            CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD
PROTEST OF:
                                      )
WATKINS SECURITY AGENCY OF D.C., INC. )
                                      )                        CAB No. P-0709
Under Contract No. POFA-20050D-003    )

       For the Protester, Watkins Security Agency of D.C., Inc.: Dirk Haire, Esq., Holland and
Knight LLP. For the Government: Howard Schwartz, Esq., and Jon N. Kurlish, Esq., Assistant
Attorneys General.

       Opinion by Administrative Judge Matthew S. Watson, with Chief Administrative Judge
Jonathan D. Zischkau and Administrative Judge Warren J. Nash, concurring.

                                            OPINION
                                    (LexisNexis Filing ID 6589730)

        Watkins Security Agency of D.C., Inc., has protested award of the subject contract on the
basis that the evaluation of both its proposal and the proposal of the awardee, Hawk One
Security, Inc., were arbitrary and unreasonable. We find the District’s justification of substantial
parts of the evaluations to be unpersuasive. We further find that the evaluation narratives do not
indicate that either the evaluators or the contracting officer carefully reviewed the Best and Final
Offers (“BAFO”) of either the protester or the awardee and that the evaluations were based in
substantial part on faulty assumptions of the BAFO contents. Since portions of each evaluation
are clearly arbitrary and unreasonable, it is impossible for the Board to determine whether the
award determination as a whole was not arbitrary and unreasonable. The protest is sustained and
the matter remanded to the contracting officer for a de novo reevaluation of the BAFOs, or, if the
contracting officer finds that it is necessary to receive further BAFOs, to appropriately evaluate
those offers.

                                        BACKGROUND

        On September 7, 2004, the Office of Contracts and Procurement issued a solicitation on
behalf of the Metropolitan Police Department requesting proposals to perform security services
at 167 public schools currently being performed by the protester under a contract with the
District of Columbia Public Schools (“DCPS”). The change in the contracting agency
undertaking the solicitation was mandated by the School Safety and Security Contracting
Procedures Act of 2004, D.C. Law 15-350, April 13, 2005, which provided that “[r]esponsibility
for the issuance of a Request for Proposals for any security guard or security related contract for
DCPS for a contract term to begin June 30, 2005, or later shall be transferred to the MPD as of
August 2, 2004.” In addition, the enactment of the Child and Youth, Safety and Health Omnibus
Temporary Amendment Act of 2004, D.C. Law 15-117, imposed requirements in performing
future contracts beyond those required in the previous DCPS contract. Both of these changes
required offerors to submit proposals substantially different from proposals which may have
been responsive to previous solicitations for similar services.
                                                        -2-        Watkins Security Agency of D.C., Inc., CAB No. P-0709



                                                  DISCUSSION

        Although the evaluation of technical proposals is within the discretion of the contracting
agency because the agency is responsible for defining its own needs and the best method of
achieving them, the Board will examine the record to determine whether an award decision was
reasonable. Trifax Corporation, CAB No. P-0539, Sept. 25, 1998, 45 D.C. Reg. 8842, 8847. An
evaluation is clearly unreasonable if it is based in substantial part on a plainly erroneous reading
of a proposal. Intown Properties, Inc., B-262236.2, Jan 18, 1996, 96-1 CPD ¶ 89.

        The Agency Report states that “Watkins Security’s proposal continued to exhibit real
technical weaknesses after the BAFO. For example, after BAFOs and the fourth round of
responses, some five weaknesses persisted in the Understanding of Requirements subfactor of
the Management Capability factor. (AR Ex.18.A, 4-5). One of the Child Safety Act related
weaknesses referenced was Watkins’ failure to have its proposed list of criminal offenses, that
would automatically disqualify persons from employment as guards, match up with the
Solicitation requirements.” (AR, 21).        The contracting officer’s Business Clearance
Memorandum (“BCM”), quoting the evaluation and citing page 12 of Watkin’s proposal,
emphasizes the importance of this weakness by specifically giving a list of offenses allegedly not
covered by Watkins disqualification policy. The BCM stated, “[f]or example, a conviction for
possession of controlled substances; theft, fraud, forgery, extortion or blackmail; trespass or
injury to property; and burglary are excluded from the list of automatically disqualifying
offenses.” (AR Ex. 6, 27). In fact, pages 12 and 13 of Watkin’s BAFO specifically list the
offenses given in the example.1 Reliance on an objectively incorrect reading of the proposal
makes that portion of the evaluation unreasonable per se.
1
    C.3.30.2 CRIMINAL BACKGROUND CHECKS:

         All Watkins employees (pre-employment or existing employees) assigned duties and/or
         responsibilities to this contract will submit to a Criminal Background check to certify that they
         meet the standards of the Act and of the contract.

                                                          * * *
         [Watkins] will provide evidence that a criminal background check has been done on all
         applicants/employees for school security positions (with disqualifying Convictions, i.e. not simply
         arrests) including murder, attempted murder, manslaughter, arson, assault, battery, assault and
         battery, assault with a dangerous weapon, mayhem, threat to do bodily harm, burglary, forgery,
         kidnapping, theft, fraud, forgery, extortion, blackmail, illegal use or possession of a firearm,
         trespass or injury to property, sexual offenses, including, but not limited to indecent exposure,
         promoting, procuring, compelling, soliciting or engaging in prostitution, corrupting minors (sexual
         relations with children), molesting, voyeurism, committing sex acts in public, incest, rape, sexual
         assault, sexual battery, sexual abuse, child abuse, cruelty to children, and unlawful distribution or
         possession or possession with intent to distribute a controlled substance testing prior to working
         on the contract. . . . Conviction of any of the aforementioned offenses will automatically disqualify
         any employee or potential applicant from working under this contract.

                                                       * * *
         C.30.2

         Conviction of any of the aforementioned offenses will automatically disqualify any employee or
         potential applicant from working under the contract

         (AR Ex. 16, 12-13 [emphasis supplied])
                                                       -3-       Watkins Security Agency of D.C., Inc., CAB No. P-0709




        Factual discrepancies in substantial portions of the evaluation of Hawk One’s proposal
also appear. Hawk One received an “excellent” rating meaning “it exceeds most, if not all
requirements; no deficiencies” and the maximum point score for the evaluation subfactor which
included “understanding of the requirements of the Child and Youth Safety and Health Act.”
Although the District’s supplemental response asserts that the Hawk One proposal “complied
fully with the CSA requirements for drug testing,”2 the contention is not supported by the record.
The CSA mandates random testing for all employees in a "safety-sensitive" position. (§
2032(b)). The Hawk One policy on “random testing” neither covers “all employees in a ‘safety-
sensitive’ position,” nor makes sense. The policy provides:

           Random testing will be conducted for 1) employees involved in a vehicular or
           other type of accident that results in physical injury, property damage, or both;
           and 2) employees returning to a safety-sensitive position after completing a
           counseling and rehabilitation program for illegal drug use or alcohol abuse."

(AR Ex. 22, 6).       Since a “safety-sensitive position” includes “employment in which the
employee has direct contact with children and youth, is entrusted with the direct care or custody
of children and youth, and whose performance of his or her duties may affect the health, welfare,
or safety of children and youth,” (CSA, Sec. 2031(11)), virtually all positions under this contract
are “safety sensitive.” Thus, the majority of the contract employees, those employees who are
not involved in an accident or enrolled in counseling or rehabilitation program, will never be
subject to random testing. Although Hawk One’s statement describes its program as “random
testing,” the Board is at a loss to understand how testing which is triggered by an accident or
counseling could reasonably constitute “random” testing meeting the CSA requirements.

        Hawk One received a rating of “Acceptable,” meaning “meets requirements; no
deficiencies” for Management Capability. RFP § C.5.1.4.5 specifically required that the
designated project manager have “work experience including the supervision of 350 or more
employees.” Hawk One proposed a project manager who it admits had not managed more than
300 employees. (AR Ex. 17, Staff Qualification Matrix). In its reply, the District asserts that the
proposed manager “had supervised workforces of one hundred and three hundred persons . . .
and the District [was] within its discretion [to] properly consider this to be qualifying.” (Reply,
10). The Board is not aware of any authority which would permit the District to accept a
proposal which varied from a specific specification requirement without offering the same

2
    The District reply reads:

           The T[echnical] E[valuation] P[anel] and the Contracting Officer correctly found Hawk One to
           have complied fully with the CSA requirements regarding drug testing, the TEP mentioning that
           this information was provided in the “third response.” (BCM, p. 27; AR18B, p 3; compare the
           requirements of the CSA at AR1D). This third supplement to the proposal was contained in Hawk
           One’s Response to [RFP] Amendment 9, submitted April 1, 2005 (AR22). Included with the
           Response to Amendment 9 was Hawk One’s revised Drug and Alcohol Use Policy. This Policy
           provides for random drug testing and for notification of employees of the testing by providing
           them a copy of the policy and requiring that the policy be read and acknowledged by their
           signature on a copy that Hawk One would retain.

(Reply, 5)
                                              -4-      Watkins Security Agency of D.C., Inc., CAB No. P-0709



variance to all offerors. See, Greater Washington Dental Services, Inc., Quality Plan
Administrators, Inc. CAB Nos. P-0675 and P-0677, Oct. 22, 2003, 52 D.C. Reg. 4146;
Minnesota Mining and Manufacturing Co. v. Shultz, 583 F. Supp. 184 (D.D.C. 1984). The
evaluation given was unsupported by the facts and unreasonable.

        The Board has not reviewed all aspects of the evaluations. Nor does the Board presume
to reevaluate the proposals which would usurp the authority of the contracting officer and be
beyond the charter of the Board. The Board does, however, find that the noted discrepancies
between the record and the evaluation of proposals are so substantial that the Board cannot find
the overall evaluation reasonable. The Board gives no opinion on any aspect of the evaluation
not discussed here. The Board cannot reach any conclusion as to whether correction of the cited
errors would affect the overall evaluation or whether any of the specifications should be
amended. The errors in the particular factors noted may, by themselves, affect the total
evaluation and the errors may further have had an impact on the evaluation of other factors as
well, also potentially altering the outcome.

        Because the evaluations of Watkins’ and Hawk One’s proposals were unsupported to a
substantial degree, the award to Hawk One was unreasonable. If no amendments to the
solicitation are required, we direct that the District reevaluate the BAFO’s in their entirety. If
amendments to the specifications are necessary to properly state the minimum needs of the
District, solicitation of new BAFOs will be required prior to reevaluation. Since the identity of
the offerors has now been made public, as has the awardee’s pricing, we believe that
reevaluation without amendment of the specifications is preferable. If the contracting officer
determines that Watkins should have received the award, the contract with Hawk One should be
terminated and award made to Watkins.

       The protest is sustained.

       SO ORDERED.


August 29, 2005                                                    /s/ Matthew S. Watson
                                                             Administrative Judge


       /s/ Jonathan D. Zischkau
Chief Administrative Judge


      /s/ Warren J. Nash
Administrative Judge
