               DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD



PROTEST OF:

WORLD ENERGY SOLUTIONS, INC.                            )
                                                        ) CAB No. P-0759
Under RFP No. POAM-2006-D-0005                          )

        For the Protester, World Energy Solutions, Inc.: Barry J. Hurewitz, Esq., and Timothy R.
Schnabel, Esq., Wilmer Cutler Pickering Hale and Dorr LLP. For the Intervenor, Co-exprise, Inc.:
Jessica C. Abrahams, Esq., McKenna Long & Aldridge, LLP. For the District of Columbia
Government: Howard Schwartz, Esq., Senior Assistant Attorney General, and Talia S. Cohen, Esq.,
Assistant Attorney General.

      Opinion by Chief Administrative Judge Jonathan D. Zischkau, with Administrative Judge
Warren J. Nash, concurring.

                              OPINION DISMISSING PROTEST
                                           Filing ID 16488415


        World Energy Solutions filed a protest challenging the District’s issuance of an invitation for
bids in May 2007 for natural gas suppliers to participate in a June 4, 2007 online reverse auction for
the District’s natural gas supply requirements. The reverse auction was conducted by Co-exprise,
Inc., pursuant to a March 12, 2007 task order issued under an August 2006 contract it received from
the District. World Energy had also been awarded an essentially identical contract in August 2006
to carry out such reverse online auctions but its contract was terminated for convenience by the
District in February 2007. World Energy claims that the District’s contracting officer dealt in bad
faith with World Energy from August 2006 until the February 2007 termination. We conclude that
the most of the issues raised in this protest are properly contract administration claims which have
been raised, and will be addressed, in a separate appeal filed with the Board under CAB No. D-1308.
To the extent that the protest allegations challenge the August 18, 2006 award to Co-exprise, those
allegations are clearly untimely. Accordingly, we dismiss the protest.

                                             BACKGROUND

        According to the protest, beginning in May 2006, Jonathan Harvey, Vice President of
Business Development for World Energy, was having discussions with John Soderberg, a
contracting officer for the District’s Office of Contracting and Procurement (“OCP”), regarding an
anticipated request for proposals to address the District’s energy supply needs. (Protest ¶ 11).
World Energy alleges that beginning at a meeting on May 18, 2006, regarding the RFP to be issued,
Soderberg personally solicited World Energy to participate in a private brokering transaction
involving foreign oil. Soderberg allegedly invited World Energy’s participation on subsequent
occasions but World Energy states that “it repeatedly declined to participate in the transaction.”
(Protest ¶ 12).

       On June 26, 2006, OCP issued RFP No. POAM-2006-R-0005 for the “performance of real-
                                                 -2-       World Energy Solutions, Inc., CAB No. P-0759


time, online reverse energy auctions, energy acquisition services and energy consultant services.”
(District’s June 11, 2007 Motion to Dismiss/Agency Report (“AR”), Ex. 1). Soderberg was the
procurement contracting officer and the RFP stated that Soderberg would execute any award
pursuant to the RFP. The RFP contemplated that the successful offeror would conduct reverse
auctions in order to identify the lowest-cost supplier of natural gas or electricity to meet the
District’s energy supply requirements. The RFP also contained a “Metropolitan Washington
Council of Governments Rider Clause” which allowed over governments with the Council of
Governments (“COG”) to purchase services under the contract. (AR Ex. 1, Section K.8; Protest ¶
13).

         On July 10, 2006, OCP issued Amendment No. 1, which provided answers to various
questions about the RFP. (AR Ex. 2). Proposals were due on July 26, and World Energy and Co-
exprise were the only offerors to submit proposals. OCP conducted discussions with the offerors
and received best and final offers on August 15 (Co-exprise) and August 16 (World Energy). (AR
Ex. 3). On August 16, 2006, OCP issued RFP Amendment No. 2, which reserved to the District the
right to make multiple awards. (AR Ex. 2). World Energy states that Amendment No. 2 was issued
to the offerors only minutes before the closing time for BAFOs and after it had already submitted its
BAFO. World Energy and Co-exprise acknowledged the amendments. (AR Ex. 2). After the RFP
closed and after negotiations and evaluations, the contracting officer determined that World Energy
and Co-exprise were both technically equal and that their prices for the reverse auctions were fair
and reasonable. (AR Ex. 3). World Energy offered a lower price for the natural gas services while
Co-exprise offered a lower price for the electricity services. As recorded in his Business Clearance
Memorandum dated August 18, 2007, the contracting officer decided to award contracts to both
World Energy and Co-exprise. (AR Ex. 3). On August 18, 2006, the contracting officer awarded
Contract No. POAM-2006-D-0005-A (AR Ex. 4) to Co-exprise and Contract No. POAM-2006-D-
0005-B to World Energy (AR Ex. 5). Soderberg told Havey on August 18 that both World Energy
and Co-exprise would receive contracts for energy acquisition services, that World Energy would
receive a task order to conduct the first natural gas auction but that no decision had yet been made as
to which company would conduct an expected auction for electricity. (Protest ¶ 15).

      By an undated letter from World Energy to Soderberg, faxed to OCP on August 23, 2006,
World Energy stated in pertinent part:

       [W]e are concerned about the impact of the District’s unexpected decision to modify
       Section B.2 of the solicitation and award multiple contracts for this requirement after
       World Energy had submitted their Best and Final Offer . . . . Inasmuch as World
       Energy’s BAFO reflected a pricing model based upon a single-award contract, the
       possibility of receiving only a partial (i.e., natural gas only) award may seriously
       undermine the basis of the World Energy proposal. . . . World Energy respectfully
       requests a debriefing to address any deficiencies in its proposal that may have led
       your office to solicit an alternative awardee.

(AR Ex. 6). On August 31, 2006, Soderberg issued a notice to proceed to World Energy, directing it
to conduct the first natural gas reverse auction. (AR Ex. 7).
                                                  -3-       World Energy Solutions, Inc., CAB No. P-0759


        On September 7, 2006, Soderberg conducted a debriefing as requested by World Energy on
August 23. Soderberg informed World Energy of Co-exprise’s offered prices and that Co-exprise
would be selected to conduct the electricity reverse auction. (Protest ¶ 16). World Energy never
timely filed a protest challenging either the solicitation amendment permitting multiple awards nor
of the award made to Co-exprise.

        By email of September 20, 2006, World Energy’s John Harvey requested that Soderberg
clarify with the other members of the Council of Governments (“COG”) that they could acquire both
electricity and natural gas reverse auction services from World Energy under its contract, POAM-
2006-D-0005-B. By reply email the same day, Soderberg confirmed that the COG members may
use either the District’s contract with World Energy or the District’s contract with Co-exprise to
satisfy their energy auction needs. (AR Ex. 8). Soderberg added that the District had tasked Co-
exprise to conduct the first electricity auction and World Energy to conduct the first natural gas
auction.

        By internal OCP email dated September 22, 2006, the contracting officer decided to “lock
in” the prices of natural gas that were quoted by Washington Gas Energy Services, Inc, under the
third option year of a cooperative purchase agreement which the District had previously entered into
with Prince William County Public Schools, a solicitation agent for the COG. (AR Ex. 9). By letter
to World Energy dated September 22, 2006, the contracting officer notified World Energy that the
District had decided to rescind the August 31 notice to proceed with the natural gas action since it
was in the best interest of the District to exercise the option on the current supply contract rather
than conduct the reverse auction. (AR Ex. 9).

        By letter dated October 13, 2006, World Energy filed with the contracting officer a dispute
pursuant to the disputes clause of its contract. (AR Ex. 10). World Energy raised a number of issues
with respect to contract administration: (a) rescission of the notice to proceed with the natural gas
auction was inconsistent with the District’s obligation to World Energy under the contract, and
revealed a “bait-and-switch” by the District with respect to the allocation of work under the contract;
(b) the contract is a requirements contract mandating that the District’s energy supply acquisition
requirements be filled by World Energy; (c) the contract entitles World Energy to conduct online
reverse auctions to whatever extent that the District has requirements for natural gas and/or electrical
power; (d) the District’s rescission notice constitutes a breach of the contract and is not a permissible
termination for convenience unless the District has a valid reason for the termination; (e) at the time
of award of contract, the District acted in bad faith since the District did not intend to honor its
commitment to utilize World Energy’s services for its natural gas and electrical power supply
acquisition requirements; and (f) the contracting officer’s administration of the contract was tainted
by a conflict of interest since World Energy refused to participate in an unrelated prospective
transaction in which World Energy understood the contracting officer to have a significant and direct
personal financial interest and that any resulting personal disappointment or frustration with World
Energy regarding that matter irretrievably compromised the contracting officer’s objectivity for
administering the contract. (AR Ex. 10).

        On October 26, 2006, Harvey from World Energy initiated a meeting with Soderberg in an
effort to resolve the October 13 claims. We learn from an undated letter from World Energy
                                                 -4-       World Energy Solutions, Inc., CAB No. P-0759


received by the contracting officer on November 3, 2006, that at this meeting the parties agreed to
“defer formal dispute procedures” while they attempted to resolve the dispute by the contracting
officer proposing “contract modifications that would specify standards for issuing task orders for all
requirements within the scope of work.” (AR Ex. 12; CAB D-1308 Complaint ¶ 33). Soderberg had
a draft response denying each of the claims of World Energy, however the draft letter was never
delivered to World Energy and was left as a memorandum to the file containing the contracting
officer’s rationale for rejecting World Energy’s October 13 claims. (AR Ex. 11; District’s June 26,
2007 Reply). In the memorandum, the contracting officer indicates that (1) World Energy
acknowledged Amendment 2 to the RFP and agreed, without objection, to multiple awards; (2)
future natural gas reverse auctions may be required by the District and participating parties but the
District is not required to procure its energy requirements only through reverse auctions; and (3)
logistics, timing, price, and the slow progress of World Energy to move the auction forward were
factors in his determination to rescind the notice to proceed and instead exercise an option on
another existing contract. (AR Ex. 11).

        By letter dated November 8, 2006, Soderberg responded to World Energy setting forth the
procedures by which he would evaluate World Energy and Co-exprise to determine the awardee of
future task orders for natural gas and electricity. In addition, the contracting officer notified World
Energy that the District may decide to fill the need for energy by direct purchases from suppliers,
without using reverse auction services. (AR Ex. 12). In a December 8, 2006 letter, World Energy
responded to the contracting officer and requested further clarification of the procedures for
awarding future task orders and requesting appropriate contract modifications to clarify that the
contract would not be administered as a “full requirements” contract. (AR Ex. 12). By letter dated
December 26, 2006, the contracting officer responded to the December 8, 2006 letter of World
Energy, declining to revise the procedures set forth in his letter dated November 8, 2006, and
concluding the letter by stating: “If World Energy does not believe that it can meet the terms
required by these task order evaluation criteria please let me know and we can discuss the possibility
of releasing World Energy from the above referenced contract or formally amending the terms
thereof.” (AR Ex. 12).

         On February 8, 2007, Ms. Patti Lovelady, an energy consultant working on behalf of OCP,
called Harvey to ask if World Energy would be interested in canceling the contract and participating
in a re-competition. Harvey stated that World Energy was fully committed to providing services to
meet the District’s full energy supply procurement requirements, and that it would not agree to
cancel its contract. By letter of February 15, 2007, Harvey reiterated World Energy’s objection to
the suggestion that it agree to cancel the contract. (World Energy 06-19-2007 Response, Ex. 17).
He explained that a re-competition of the contract would be problematic, as World Energy’s pricing
for the natural gas auction had become public as a result of the prior award, and that a re-competition
would allow competitors to undercut World Energy’s pricing.

      On February 27, 2007, Soderberg issued a notice terminating World Energy’s contract for the
convenience of the District, effective March 1, 2007. (AR Ex. 13).

       By Amendment M0001 to Co-exprise’s contract signed by Soderberg on March 8, 2007, Co-
exprise agreed to reduce its price for the reverse auction for natural gas from $0.07/dth to
                                                 -5-       World Energy Solutions, Inc., CAB No. P-0759


$0.0495/dth as a flat fee for all natural gas volumes acquired through the reverse auction. (AR Ex.
2). Co-exprise’s revised price thus was exactly $0.005 less than the BAFO price ($0.05/dth) offered
by World Energy in August 2006.

       On March 12, 2007, Soderberg issued a notice to proceed to Co-exprise to perform the
reverse auction for natural gas. (AR Ex. 14). By email string dated April 9, 2007 and April 10,
2007, between World Energy and the District, the contracting officer notified World Energy that Co-
exprise was going to conduct the reverse energy auction for natural gas. (AR Ex. 15).

        On May 4, 2007, the District issued an invitation for bids to identify natural gas supply
providers to participate in the online reverse auction to supply natural gas to be conducted by Co-
exprise pursuant to its August 2006 contract and the March 12, 2007 task order. World Energy
states that it learned of the invitation for bids on May 16, 2007.

        World Energy filed its protest on May 18, 2007, protesting the District’s “designation of Co-
exprise to conduct this natural gas supply auction.” (Protest, at 2). World Energy argues that it, not
Co-exprise, should have been the one to conduct the online reverse auction. World Energy
simultaneously filed a notice of appeal with our Board, docketed as CAB No. D-1308, stating in
pertinent part:

       [World Energy] hereby files this notice of appeal based on actions taken by the
       Office of Contracting and Procurement (“OCP”) regarding contract number POAM-
       2006-D-0005-B (“the Contract”). World Energy notices this appeal to contest OCP’s
       termination of the Contract and the contracting officer’s failure to recuse himself in
       light of a conflict of interest. This appeal is timely, as it is being filed less than 90
       days after the termination was issued on February 27, 2007, as well as “within a
       reasonable time” after the Contracting Officer’s failure to render a final decision on
       World Energy’s request for his recusal, which was submitted on October 13, 2006.

(CAB No. D-1308, Notice of Appeal, at 1).

        By Determination and Finding to Proceed with Contract Performance While a Protest is
Pending (“D&F”) dated May 29, 2007, the District decided to continue with the reverse auction for
natural gas, which was scheduled for June 4, 2007. On May 30, 2007, World Energy challenged the
District’s D&F, but the Board sustained the D&F in an order dated June 1, 2007. Co-exprise
conducted the online reverse auction on June 4, 2007, as scheduled.

                                           DISCUSSION

        World Energy frames its protest as challenging the May 2007 invitation for bids issued to the
natural gas suppliers to participate in the online reverse auction that was to be conducted by Co-
exprise on June 4, 2007. Thus, World Energy asserts that (1) the District made an improper sole
source “selection” of Co-exprise to conduct the reverse auction; (2) World Energy was improperly
excluded from revising its BAFO pricing but Co-exprise was permitted to reduce its pricing slightly
below World Energy’s prices; (3) Co-exprise was a nonresponsible contractor; (4) the contracting
                                                 -6-       World Energy Solutions, Inc., CAB No. P-0759


officer failed to follow task order award procedures spelled out in his November 8, 2006 letter; (5)
the District failed to award the reverse auction to a required source, namely World Energy; and (6)
the contracting officer was subject to a conflict of interest that compelled his recusal from selecting
the contractor to conduct the reverse auction for natural gas supplies.

        The facts demonstrate that World Energy’s true complaint is that Soderberg, the contracting
officer, improperly dealt with it after contract award in August 2006, including the rescission of its
August 31, 2006 task order to conduct the natural gas reverse auction, the series of transactions
relating to its October 13, 2006 contract claims, and culminating in the February 27, 2007
convenience termination of its contract. World Energy’s allegations are properly seen as contract
administration disputes that are properly within our dispute jurisdiction and will be addressed in
World Energy’s appeal, CAB No. D-1308. To the extent that the protest allegations challenge the
August 18, 2006 award to Co-exprise, those allegations are clearly untimely. World Energy
received a debriefing on September 7, 2006, and never filed a protest challenging the dual award to
Co-exprise nor the amendment permitting multiple awards.

       For these reasons, we dismiss World Energy’s protest.

       SO ORDERED.


DATED: September 28, 2007                              /s/ Jonathan D. Zischkau
                                                       JONATHAN D. ZISCHKAU
                                                       Chief Administrative Judge


CONCURRING:



/s/ Warren J. Nash
WARREN J. NASH
Administrative Judge
