                     GOVERNMENT OF THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA
                           CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD



PROTEST OF:

WATKINS SECURITY AGENCY OF D.C., INC.                          )
                                                               )      CAB Nos. P-0711, P-0712
Under Solicitation No. POAM-2004-R-0015-DW                     )        (Consolidated)

        For the Protester: Dirk Haire, Esq., and Stuart Turner, Esq., Holland & Knight LLP. For the
District of Columbia Government: Howard Schwartz, Esq., Senior Assistant Attorney General, and Jon
N. Kulish, Esq., Assistant Attorney General.

      Opinion by Chief Administrative Judge Jonathan D. Zischkau, with Administrative Judge
Warren J. Nash, concurring.

                                              OPINION
                                       LexisNexis Filing ID 7700632

         Watkins Security Agency of D.C., Inc., has protested the award of four aggregate award groups
for city-wide security services to Hawk One Security, Inc. Watkins attacks the award on a number of
fronts, including that the contracting officer and technical evaluation panel improperly evaluated and
scored Watkins’ and Hawk One’s proposals, that the evaluation and selection was not properly
documented, and that Hawk One should not have received a 9 percent preference under the then-
applicable Equal Opportunity for Local, Small, and Disadvantaged Business Enterprises Act of 1998,
D.C. Law 12-268, as amended. After briefing by the parties, Watkins’ main challenge to the evaluation
focuses on the experience and past performance factor within the technical evaluation. During
evaluation of the initial proposals, the three technical evaluation panel members gave Watkins
individual past performance scores each of 34, 34, and 30 out of a total possible score of 40 but during
their initial consensus evaluation, they came up with an average score of 25 for Watkins. The
consensus report reflects the scoring but does not provide any explanation for the scoring except for the
individual evaluation rating forms. The contracting officer made her own independent evaluation of the
proposals, identifying strengths and weaknesses, and agreed with the scoring found in the consensus
report for the initial proposals. We have reviewed the evaluation materials and the contracting officer’s
assessment and conclude that the evaluation and scoring is supported by the record. Moreover, this
initial evaluation and scoring was superseded by the subsequent evaluation and scoring done in
connection with the best and final offers (“BAFOs”) submitted by the offerors. We find that Watkins
was not treated unequally during evaluation and that the contracting officer adequately documented the
evaluation and selection. We have considered each of Watkins’ grounds of protest but conclude that
the contracting officer did not violate either the law or the terms of the solicitation. Accordingly, we
deny the consolidated protests.

                                          BACKGROUND

         On August 4, 2004, the District of Columbia Office of Contracting and Procurement (“OCP”)
issued Request for Proposals No. POAM-2004-R-0015-DW. The District issued this solicitation to
satisfy its requirement for city-wide security services at about 100 District-owned and leased facilities
                                              -2-                 Watkins Security, CAB Nos. P-0711, P-0712


that are open to the public. OCP has managed the solicitation, award, and administration of the contract
for the Protective Services Division (“PSD”) of the District. The solicitation, issued in the set-aside
market, called for offers on four separate Aggregate Award Groups and allowed award of each group to
a different offeror or to any combination of offerors. The solicitation allowed the award of all four
groups to a single contractor. (Agency Report (“AR”), at 3; AR Ex. 1 (Solicitation §§ L.1.1 (page 47)
and M.1 (pages 55-56); AR Ex. 19 (Contracting Officer’s Business Clearance Memorandum (“BCM”)
(pages 5-6)); AR Ex. 21 (Declaration of Karen Hester, Contracting Officer ¶ 3).

        Among other evaluation criteria, the offerors were to be scored separately for each of award
groups 1, 2, 3 and 4, as specified by solicitation section M.1.1, as amended by Amendment 1. (AR Exs.
1 (page 56), 3 (pages 18-19), 19 (§ 4.1, page 5), 21 (¶ 6)). The following were the evaluation factors
prescribed by the solicitation: technical factors worth a maximum of 60 points; price factors worth a
maximum of 40 points; and LSDBE preference factors worth a maximum of 12 points. (AR Ex. 1
(page 58)). The technical criteria consisted of Experience and Past Performance (maximum of 40
points) and Management Capability (maximum of 20 points). The price evaluation was mathematically
determined, with the lowest price offeror receiving the maximum 40 points, and other offerors receiving
a proportionately lower total score.

       For the Experience and Past Performance technical factor, Section L.3.1.1 states:

       Offerors shall submit a technical plan that will detail its understanding of the
       requirements and its approach to successfully provide services to satisfy the District’s
       requirements. Offerors shall detail its experience with providing security services as
       required in the RFP including abstracts of experience that would substantiate their
       qualifications and capabilities to perform the services required by the scope of work.

Section L.3.1.2 states:

       Offerors shall submit five (5) references from current or prior customers, using the Past
       Performance Evaluation Form, Attachment J.9. Offerors shall assure that current and
       past performance customers listed in the proposal complete and sign the Performance
       Evaluation Form and return them with the proposal. The District reserves the right to
       contact known present customers of the Offeror, or past customers in the last three (3)
       years NOT provided as a reference, and the information received may be used in the
       evaluation of past performance. In addition, offerors shall provide the following
       information for each reference submitted: name and location of the project, brief
       description of the project, contract number, original and final contract value, start and
       completion date and email, fax and telephone number of the person providing the
       reference.

     Regarding the technical factor for Management Capability, Section L.3.2 (“Section 2 –
Management Plan”) provides:

       L.3.2.1 The Offeror shall submit a management plan detailing its organizational
       structure and quality assurance mechanisms including financial and accounting controls.
       This section shall contain all pertinent information relating to the Offeror's organization,
                                              -3-                  Watkins Security, CAB Nos. P-0711, P-0712


       including resumes of personnel to be assigned and the percentage of time that each will
       devote to the contract.

       L.3.2.2 Each proposal shall identify the aggregate group(s) (Attachment J.1), for which
       the offeror wishes to be considered. Each group shall be listed in the order of priority in
       which the offeror wishes to be considered.

       L.3.2.3 This section shall also include the following information: (a) Location of
       headquarters; (b) A chart of the offeror's internal organization which shows the number
       of full-time personnel and their level of responsibility within that organization; and (c)
       The name of the person who manages the firm and makes policy.

         Eleven offerors responded to the solicitation by submitting proposals. Five of the proposals
were not evaluated, having been disqualified because either they were submitted later than the
September 7, 2004 due date or were submitted by companies not certified for the set-aside market.
Among the offerors entering the evaluation and selection process were Hawk One and Watkins. (AR,
at 3-4; AR Ex. 19 (pages 5-6); AR Ex. 21 (¶¶ 3, 8)). The District commenced with technical and price
evaluation of the remaining six proposals the week after the submission date for offers. OCP performed
the first evaluation of initial offers with the assistance of a technical evaluation panel (“TEP”) from the
Protective Services Division (“PSD”) of the D.C. Office of Property Management (“OPM”) and
cost/price analysts from OCP. This evaluation considered both technical and price factors.

        The contracting officer held an orientation meeting with the TEP members on September 14,
2004, and provided them with the proposals and a “Proposal Evaluation Guidelines and Instructions”
document to assist them in their evaluation. (AR Ex. 19; AR Ex.19(a); AR at 6). The Guidelines
included rating sheets for the two technical factors, Management Capability and Experience and Past
Performance, but these rating sheets did not provide for scoring at any subfactor level of detail.
Therefore, the TEP members developed consensus subfactor ratings for the two technical factors,
agreeing on subfactors and assigned corresponding point values for each subfactor, such that the total of
the maximum subfactor points equaled the maximum number of points for the corresponding factor.
The TEP members took the subfactors that they incorporated in the rating worksheet (see AR Ex. 22,
Attachment), from the Proposal Evaluation Guidelines and Instructions which in turn was based on
section L.3 of the solicitation. (AR at 11-12; AR Ex. 22, Declaration of Chief Bracy, PSD, TEP Panel
Chairman). According to the TEP panel chairman, the TEP members individually used this subfactor
rating worksheet to score each offeror’s initial proposal (as well as the subsequent BAFO). (AR at 12).

       The TEP members performed individual evaluations of the initial proposals. Each member used
the subfactors and subfactor point values as guides to arrive at a total numerical score for each factor
and a total technical score for both factors. Each also provided narrative ratings and evaluation
comments on the strengths and weaknesses of each proposal. The TEP provided an initial “Technical
Evaluation Summary Report” to the contracting officer on October 6, 2004. The record contains a
“Consensus Report” dated October 4, 2004, signed by the TEP members and providing in spreadsheet
form consensus evaluation scores for the six offerors being evaluated. (AR Ex. 19(b)). Hawk One
received a consensus score of 35 for the Experience and Past Performance factor and 17.5 for the
Management Capability factor, for a total consensus technical score of 52.5 (out of 60). Watkins
received a consensus score of 25 for the Experience and Past Performance factor and 20 for the
                                              -4-                 Watkins Security, CAB Nos. P-0711, P-0712


Management Capability factor, for a total consensus technical score of 45 (out of 60). The other 4
offerors total technical scores were lower than the totals for Hawk One and Watkins.

        After reviewing the report, the contracting officer re-directed the TEP “to clarify some of the
narratives and evaluate each Offeror’s proposal strictly against each criteria in the solicitation and to
provide evaluator narratives detailing strengths and weaknesses for each evaluation factor.” (AR Ex.
19, at 8). The TEP resumed their technical evaluations of the proposals and prepared individual
evaluations on rating forms that are dated for the most part as of October 14 and 15, 2004. (AR Ex. 11).
One evaluator’s rating sheets for Watkins show scores of 34 for Experience and Past Performance and
17.5 for Management Capability, for a total of 51.5 out of 60 for the technical evaluation. Another
evaluator’s rating sheets for Watkins show scores of 30 for Experience and Past Performance and 15 for
Management Capability, for a total of 45 out of 60 for the technical evaluation. The third evaluator’s
rating sheets for Watkins show scores of 34 for Experience and Past Performance and 18 for
Management Capability, for a total of 52 out of 60 for the technical evaluation. For Hawk One, the
rating sheets of the three TEP members show total technical ratings of 56, 53, and 49, out of the 60
maximum possible. (AR Ex. 11).

       On October 15, 2004, the TEP members again met to discuss their evaluations and ratings and
then determined a consensus evaluation for the six offerors. (AR Ex. 22, ¶ 5). The results are
documented in a memorandum dated October 15, 2004, addressed to the contracting officer (Karen
Hester) from the TEP chairman (Arnold Bracey). (AR Ex. 19(b)(1)). The one-page memorandum
provides in relevant part:

       Please find the following technical evaluations for your review. Each proposal was
       evaluated with strict conformity to the evaluation criteria in Section M.5 of the RFP.
       The Committee members evaluated and scored each proposal separately and then
       developed a consensus score.

       The Committee utilized an objective scoring system strictly adhering to requirements
       and criteria listed in section L of the solicitation to develop the consensus score.

       Using the above referenced scoring system the proposals scored as follows:

       Hawk One        52.5 (Good)*            All Agg Grps
       Watkins         45 (Acceptable)*        All Agg Grps
       ....

       * It is the Committee’s belief that these proposals can be easily corrected to address
       weaknesses in the BAFO process

       The Committee also included the individual evaluations with comments.

It appears that the individual evaluation sheets were attached to this memorandum. Two of the three
TEP members transferred individual factor scores and the total technical score to the factor rating sheets
that the contracting officer had provided in the Proposal Evaluation Guidelines and Instructions, and
included narratives of strengths and weaknesses on the factor rating sheets. They submitted to the
                                              -5-                 Watkins Security, CAB Nos. P-0711, P-0712


contracting officer the factor rating sheets, which included only the total numerical scores and narrative
descriptions of strengths and weaknesses for each factor. These two members did not submit their
subfactor rating sheets with the subfactor numerical scores. The third member submitted the factor
rating sheets with the numerical scores but also submitted his subfactor rating sheets containing all of
his numerical factor and subfactor ratings and narrative ratings. (AR at 12; AR Ex. 22, ¶ 4; AR Exs. 11,
12).

         The contracting officer received the consensus report and evaluation sheets on October 19,
2005. (AR Ex. 19, BCM ¶ 5.2, at 8). After the initial technical evaluations were made by the TEP and
the price evaluation was completed by the OCP analysts, the contracting officer made an independent
evaluation of the proposals. (AR Ex. 21, ¶ 5, 8-11; AR Ex. 19, BCM, at 8-15). The contracting officer
noted, inter alia, that Hawk One presented an excellent understanding of the District’s requirements,
that the proposal provided detailed information in response to the technical requirements of the scope of
work, that Hawk One showed security services experience and submitted four of the required five
references that were verified by OCP. The fifth reference related to its performance of security services
for the District’s Protective Services Division of OPM (covering over half of the facilities for which the
District was seeking security services under this solicitation). Hawk One had submitted a reference
form for the city-wide security services predecessor contracts to the contracting officer’s technical
representative, who happened to be Arnold Bracy, the TEP chairman for this solicitation, and Chief of
the Protective Services Division. He states in an affidavit that Hawk One had timely requested by fax
that he prepare a performance evaluation of Hawk One which it would include in its proposal as one of
the five references. Bracy states:

       For various reasons, I did not complete the evaluation form by the time the TEP met to
       evaluate initial proposals. I believed, and still believe, that Hawk One had requested the
       evaluation in a timely manner and should not be penalized. Therefore, I provided oral
       reports of Hawk One’s good performance to the other TEP members when we
       performed the evaluations of the initial offers and to the Contracting Officer when she
       was performing her evaluation. . . .

(AR Ex. 29 ¶ 4). Bracy further states in his affidavit that he completed the past performance reference
form for Hawk One on October 29, 2004.

        The contracting officer’s independent evaluation of Watkins’ proposal noted that Watkins
presented an “acceptable understanding” of the District’s requirements, demonstrated capability with
projects of similar size and scope with an “impressive past experience” that included the entire D.C.
Public School System and two other contracts. The contracting officer noted that Watkins had
submitted 3 of the required 5 references and that two references were verified by OCP while the
reference from DCPS had not been verified. (AR Ex. 19, BCM, at 9). The contracting officer provides
additionally in her assessment:

       Major requirements of the security program were adequately addressed in the proposal,
       including management philosophy, recruitment and quality assurance. However, the
       proposal does not address the 16 hour first aid/CPR requirement or the 16 hour
       supervisory training requirement.
                                              -6-                  Watkins Security, CAB Nos. P-0711, P-0712


       The evaluation committee rated Watkins’ proposal as “Acceptable”. Overall the
       Contracting Officer concurs with the findings of the evaluation committee.

(AR Ex. 19, BCM, at 10).

         The contracting officer, in her Business Clearance Memorandum, reviewed the price analysis of
the initial proposals, in which Hawk One received scores for the aggregate groups of 39, 39.3, 31, and
39.4, while Watkins received scores of 37, 37, 30, and 37. (AR Ex. 19, BCM, at 13-15). The
contracting officer ranked the offerors according to highest overall score to lowest, for purposes of the
competitive range determination, and Hawk One ranked first followed by Watkins in second place.

       For preference points under the LSDBE Act, Hawk One received 9 points and Watkins received
6 points. (AR Ex. 19, BCM, at 8). At the time it submitted its proposal and supporting documents,
Hawk One possessed a valid, current certification from the District’s Local Business Opportunity
Commission (“LBOC”) that it was a Local Business Enterprise (“LBE”); a Small Business Enterprise
(“SBE”); a Disadvantaged Business Enterprise (“DBE”); and a business located in a Development
Enterprise Zone (“DEZ”). The certification was valid through June 24, 2005. (AR Ex. 20). Hawk One
submitted the certification with its proposal and, in the proposal, identified its business address as 3172
Martin Luther King Avenue, S.E., Washington D.C. 20032, the same address used by the LBOC in its
above certification. (AR Ex. 6 (page 18); AR Ex. 20). Based upon the LBOC certification, the
contracting officer awarded Hawk One nine LSDBE preference points, consisting of two points for
DEZ status; four points for LBE status; and three points for DBE status. (AR Ex. 19 (pages 8, 25)).

         In a memorandum to the contracting officer dated November 15, 2004, submitted as an
addendum to the October 15 memorandum consensus report, the TEP chairman stated that the TEP’s
initial scores “also represented the order of the aggregate group we felt they [the offerors] were best
qualified for. . . .” (AR Ex. 19(b), at 2). The list showed Hawk One with aggregate group I, Watkins
with group II, and two other offerors with groups III and IV.

        Written discussions were conducted with the offerors in the competitive range. The contracting
officer requested BAFOs from the offerors by letters dated November 23, 2004. The letters requested
specific responses to questions posed to each offeror. In the letter to Watkins, one of the questions
reads:

       Offeror submitted three of the five references from current or prior customers, using the
       Past Performance Evaluation Form as required by Paragraph L.3.1.2. If the Offeror has
       no other references to submit please so state.

(AR Ex. 7). Hawk One and Watkins submitted BAFOs by the December 3, 2004 deadline.

       Upon receiving the BAFOs and accompanying information from the offerors, each TEP member
individually re-evaluated the technical proposals in light of the new information in the BAFOs. (AR
Ex. 12). The TEP members then met, discussed the evaluations, and arrived at a consensus final
evaluation, memorialized in a memorandum dated December 16, 2004, that the TEP submitted to the
contracting officer. (AR Ex. 19(f)(1); AR Ex. 22, ¶ 5; AR Ex. 19). The contracting officer summarized
the TEP’s evaluation of the BAFOs together with the initial proposals as follows:
                                             -7-                  Watkins Security, CAB Nos. P-0711, P-0712




       The [TEP’s] initial scores provided the baseline scores upon which the BAFO technical
       proposals were evaluated. Upon evaluation of the BAFO submissions, the Panel
       adjusted up or down or left intact the baseline scores. Although adjustments were made
       to the scores of four (4) Offerors after evaluation of the BAFO submission, the ranking
       of the Offerors remained the same as it was after the initial evaluation. . . .

(AR Ex. 19, BCM, at 22). The contracting officer summarized the TEP’s BAFO evaluation for each
offeror, noting that Hawk One’s technical score increased by one point and its adjectival rating
remained “good.” For Watkins, the summary provided as follows:

       One panel member noted that the Watkins . . . BAFO did not adequately describe its
       supervisory curriculum and that it was confusing. Two additional references were
       submitted that rated the firm as outstanding. Past performance evaluation form from
       [customer] did not include the contract cost and period of performance. The panel
       increased the Offeror’s technical score by five (5) points which raised the rating from
       “acceptable” to “good.”

(AR Ex. 19, BCM, at 22-23).

       In her independent assessment of the BAFO submissions, the contracting officer indicated that
Hawk One’s weaknesses in its initial proposal were addressed in the BAFO and that she agreed with the
TEP assessment that the proposal was “good.” The contracting officer similarly indicated that
Watkins’s BAFO had “addressed all questions raised by the District” and that she agreed with the
TEP’s rating of Watkins’ proposal as “good.” (AR Ex. 19, BCM, at 23-24).

       The contracting officer received the price analysis report in early January 2005. Based upon the
technical evaluations, price evaluations, and preference points awarded, the contracting officer
concluded in her source selection decision to award all four aggregate groups to Hawk One because
Hawk One was the highest ranked offeror under each award group. In a table listing the scoring data,
for aggregate group 1, Hawk One had a technical score of 53.5, a price score of 39, and preference
points of 9, for a total of 101.5 points. Watkins had a technical score of 50, a price score of 38.9,
preference points of 6, for a total of 94.9 points. The other three aggregate groups had nearly identical
scoring differentials. (AR Ex. 19, BCM, at 25). The contracting officer determined that Hawk One was
a responsible contractor, with the resources, experience and financial capability to perform the
requirements of all groups and to comply with the proposed performance schedules for the four groups,
considering all existing commercial and governmental business. (AR Ex. 21 ¶ 12; AR Ex. 19, BCM, at
26; AR Ex. 19(g)).

       From February 7, 2005, when the contracting officer issued the recommendation for award to
Hawk One, until award of the contract to Hawk One on May 16, 2005, OCP was awaiting approval of
the award recommendation by the District of Columbia Council. OCP prepared a recommendation for
award for review by the Council, forwarded the recommendation, and awaited action by the Council
and other officials that were involved in the recommended-approval action prior to its submission to the
Council. By letter on May 13, 2005, the Council informed OCP that it was authorized to award the
contract to Hawk One, because, on May 9, 2005, the award had been “deemed approved by virtue of the
                                              -8-                 Watkins Security, CAB Nos. P-0711, P-0712


Council having taken no action to disapprove it.” During this extended pre-award period, OCP did not
reopen discussions or negotiations with Hawk One or any other offeror after the source selection was
made. (AR Ex. 13; AR Ex. 21, ¶¶ 13, 14).

         The contracting officer conducted a debriefing for Watkins on August 3, 2005, having received
notice from OCP’s general counsel on July 25, 2005, of Watkins’ request for debriefing. Watkins states
that it requested the debriefing on May 18, 2005, a day after it received notice of the award to Hawk
One. During the debriefing, Watkins was advised that it was the second-highest ranked offeror, that
Hawk One’s price was slightly less than Watkins, and that the point totals were “very close.” (Protest,
CAB No. P-0711, at 5). There was a lengthy discussion of attempts by the contracting officer’s staff to
verify the past performance evaluation of Watkins work on the then-continuing D.C. Public Schools
(“DCPS”) security contract though the parties disagree as to what was said.

        On August 17, 2005, Watkins filed its first protest, docketed as CAB No. P-0711. In its protest,
Watkins alleges that (1) the technical evaluation of Watkins’ and Hawk One’s proposals was irrational
and inconsistent with the solicitation’s evaluation criteria, and (2) Hawk One was not financially
responsible and was ineligible for award. Watkins later withdrew its second count. Regarding the
technical evaluation, Watkins contends that it was improperly downgraded due to the inability of the
evaluators to obtain telephone confirmation from the author of the DCPS past performance evaluation
of Watkins. In addition, Watkins states that it was wrongly downgraded for an allegedly deficient
supervisory curriculum. In its protest, Watkins states that it received a redacted copy of the contracting
officer’s Business Clearance Memorandum on August 13, 2005. On August 26, 2005, Watkins filed its
second protest, docketed as CAB No. P-0712, developing in more detail its attack on the technical
evaluation of Hawk One and Watkins, and raising a third count challenging the award of 9 preference
points to Hawk One.

        The District filed its Agency Report on September 20, 2005, including a motion to dismiss
certain grounds. Watkins filed comments on the Agency Report on September 29, 2005. The District
responded to the comments on October 17, 2005, including an attachment with supplementary exhibits
to the Agency Report. Watkins filed supplemental comments, including a motion styled as one for
summary judgment, on October 26, 2005. In this submission, Watkins alleges that the drop of about 7.7
points in the Experience and Past Performance factor from the individual evaluations to the TEP
consensus evaluation is unsupported in the record and this point differential carried through to the final
BAFO evaluations. The District responded on November 9, 2005, and Watkins filed a reply on
November 10, 2005.

                                            DISCUSSION

       We exercise jurisdiction pursuant to D.C. Code § 2-309.03(a)(1).

       Experience and Past Performance Evaluation

         Watkins’ main challenge to the technical evaluation focuses on the Experience and Past
Performance evaluation factor scoring. During evaluation of the initial proposals, the three technical
evaluation panel members gave Watkins individual past performance scores each of 34, 34, and 30 out
of a total possible score of 40 but during their consensus evaluation meeting, they came up with a score
                                             -9-                  Watkins Security, CAB Nos. P-0711, P-0712


of 25 for Watkins, reflecting a drop of about 7.7 points. Based on our review of the record, we see no
basis for finding that the initial consensus evaluation was irrational or unsupported. The TEP members
noted deficiencies in Watkins failure to provide two of the required five references. Although four
references were included, one was so incomplete that it was discounted entirely. One reference gave an
“outstanding” rating, another had an overall rating of “good” but with over half of the individual rating
factors being only “satisfactory”, and the third valid performance form gave Watkins a “very good”
overall rating. Hawk One’s four written past performance references were uniformly “very good” or
“outstanding.” Although Chief Bracy should have completed his written evaluation of Hawk One so
that it could have been submitted with Hawk One’s proposal, we do not find under the circumstances
that it was improper for him to provide an oral assessment of Hawk One’s performance to the other
TEP members during the initial proposal consensus meeting. The contracting officer provided her own
independent evaluation of the initial proposals which concisely described the strengths and weaknesses
of each proposal. It is clear from the record that the subsequent BAFOs and re-evaluation of the
proposals in light of the BAFOs led the TEP members to increase their rating of Watkins experience
and past performance from 25 to 30 points, which no doubt took into account the newly submitted
reference with an overall rating of “outstanding.” While Watkins total score for this evaluation factor
was still a few points below the final evaluation score of Hawk One, we find adequate support in the
record for the conclusion of the TEP that Hawk One’s experience and past performance was rated
higher than Watkins’. Beyond simply one incomplete reference for Watkins (having an overall rating
of “satisfactory”), there is support that the references, experience, and past performance of Hawk One
were rated better than Watkins’. The contracting officer properly conducted her own independent
evaluation of the proposals in light of the BAFOs and came to the same conclusion as the TEP with
regard to the final technical evaluations.

        Watkins contends that it learned of a downscoring of its past performance at the debriefing
conducted by the contracting officer on August 3, 2005. The District responds that Watkins
misunderstood the debriefing information and denies that such downscoring occurred. Watkins claims
that the score for its proposal had been downgraded because of the contracting officer’s inability to
contact the cognizant DCPS representative by telephone. The contracting officer states that OCP
personnel had already received emailed confirmation of the DCPS rating, signed March 8, 2004, for
performance prior to that date which Watkins had submitted with its proposal. (AR Ex. 5, pages 28-
29). The contracting officer states that she did not reduce Watkins’ numerical score awarded by the
TEP based upon this issue. Further, the TEP chairman states that he did not downgrade the Watkins
score based upon lack of telephone confirmation of the DCPS reference and, from his recollection of
TEP discussions, does not believe that the other TEP members had done so. None of the TEP members
noted deficiencies for the DCPS rating, although two did mention that another of the required
performance evaluations submitted by Watkins (AR Ex. 5, page 27) was incomplete, because it omitted
information required on the form by solicitation section L.3.1.2. (AR Ex. 21, ¶ 15; AR Ex. 22, ¶ 7; AR
Exs. 11, 12). We find no basis for concluding in the evaluation record that Watkins was downgraded
for lack of telephone confirmation of the DCPS reference.

        Watkins also argues that it has greater experience than Hawk One in performing large and
complex security contracts and that Hawk One should have been scored lower than Watkins, not higher.
We agree with the District that the record shows Hawk One had experience with large and complex
security contracts. The work for the District government is reflected in the record and the contracting
officer concluded that the past performance of a predecessor company, Eastern Shield, did not detract
                                             - 10 -               Watkins Security, CAB Nos. P-0711, P-0712


from this experience.

       Management Capability Evaluation

        Watkins argues that the District did not fairly evaluate Watkins’ and Hawk One’s proposals
regarding the supervisory curriculum component of the management capability factor. Watkins had
received 20 points under Management Capability covering all elements of this factor, both at the initial
proposal stage as well as after BAFO evaluation. Watkins complains, however, that Hawk One should
not have been as highly rated as Watkins because Hawk One’s supervisory curriculum consisted of only
one paragraph in its proposal compared to the multi-page lesson plan summaries found in Watkins’
BAFO. Although some of the evaluation materials seem to cite deficiencies in Watkins’ initial proposal
and BAFO on this point, Watkins nonetheless was not downgraded in any way. Hawk One’s initial
proposal submission, though far less detailed than Watkins’ BAFO materials, was apparently
sufficiently stated to meet the specification requirement and receive appropriate credit for this one
element of the overall management capability factor from the TEP and the contracting officer. We are
not persuaded that the evaluation on this element of the management capability factor was unreasonable
or demonstrated unequal treatment of the offerors.

        Watkins also contends that Hawk One had a deficiency in its management section of the
proposal after BAFO, namely that Hawk One had not submitted required resumes as part of its
management plan. The requirement in solicitation section L.3.2.1 is for “resumes of personnel to be
assigned and the percentage of time that each will devote to the contract.” The District agrees that the
biographical data that Hawk One submitted with its proposal were not literally traditional resumes.
(AR Ex. 6, at 92-99 of 104). The District contends that the Hawk One submission met the requirement
for resumes and that the TEP and contracting officer properly so found. Hawk One did not cure this
issue in its BAFO submission, but relied upon its original proposal biographies. The contracting officer
did not consider the lack of resumes to be a deficiency that would require downgrading of the
management section of Hawk One’s proposal from the good rating by the TEP. She determined that the
biographies submitted by Hawk One contained the necessary information and thus served the same
purpose as resumes. We conclude that the contracting officer did not violate the terms of the
solicitation in concluding that the biographies submitted by Hawk One were the functional equivalent
of the resumes required by the solicitation.

       Documentation of the Technical Evaluation

        Watkins argues that the technical evaluation was not adequately documented. Clearly, the
October 15, 2004 consensus report for the initial proposals should have contained detailed narrative
explaining the consensus evaluation of the TEP according to the evaluation factors set forth in the
solicitation. Although the rather lean one-page consensus report fails to document the consensus
evaluation including strengths and weaknesses, we find that the contracting officer’s detailed evaluation
in the Business Clearance Memorandum, when considered with the evaluation rating sheets of the TEP,
provide adequate documentation of the technical evaluation, both at the initial proposal evaluation stage
as well as at the BAFO evaluation phase. Regarding the BAFO evaluation, we think the contracting
officer should have recorded in her Business Clearance Memorandum more detail concerning her
independent BAFO technical evaluation, including strengths and weaknesses, according to the
evaluation factors. Nevertheless, when viewing the totality of the record, we conclude that the
                                             - 11 -               Watkins Security, CAB Nos. P-0711, P-0712


technical evaluation was adequately documented.

        Watkins’ citation to the lack of documentation relating to the November 15, 2004 memorandum
from Bracy is of little relevance. The memorandum does not, in our view, reflect a significant event in
the evaluation of the proposals. In sum, we believe the evaluation documentation found in the record
adequately documents the basis for the evaluations conducted by the TEP and the contracting officer.

       LSDBE Preference Points awarded to Hawk One

       The District has moved to dismiss this protest ground as untimely because Watkins knew of the
underlying facts long before it filed this protest count on August 26, 2005. We agree with Watkins that
the ground was timely filed because Watkins did not know that this issue prejudiced it until it received
the Business Clearance Memorandum of the contracting officer.

        On the merits, we conclude that the contracting officer did not err in awarding 9 points to Hawk
One. There is no question that Hawk One was properly certified as of the date it submitted its proposal
and therefore met the certification requirements for all of the LSDBE preferences, including the DEZ
preference. It continued to be certified through the date of contract award. The fact that Hawk One’s
certification was to expire approximately a month after award does not form a basis for negating the
application of the preference points here.

                                           CONCLUSION

         Watkins has not demonstrated that the technical evaluation of Hawk One and itself violated law
or the terms of the solicitation. We find that the record adequately supports the findings of the TEP and
the contracting officer. The contracting officer properly made an independent and thorough evaluation
of the proposals as supplemented by the BAFOs, and we find no error in either her ultimate rankings or
in the source selection. We have carefully considered each of Watkins’ arguments, but conclude that
the award should be sustained. Accordingly, for the reasons discussed above, Watkins’ consolidated
protests are denied.

       SO ORDERED.

DATED: December 21, 2005                              /s/ Jonathan D. Zischkau
                                                      JONATHAN D. ZISCHKAU
                                                      Chief Administrative Judge

CONCURRING:


/s/ Warren J. Nash
WARREN J. NASH
Administrative Judge
