               DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD


PROTEST OF:

RBK LANDSCAPING & CONSTRUCTION, INC.                          )
                                                              )   CAB No. P-0753
Under IFB No. DCHA-2007-B-0002                                )

       For the Protester: Mr. Keith Lomax, President, pro se. For the District of Columbia
Government: Howard Schwartz, Esq., Senior Assistant Attorney General, and Talia S. Cohen,
Esq., Assistant Attorney General.

      Opinion by Chief Administrative Judge Jonathan D. Zischkau, with Administrative Judge
Warren J. Nash, concurring.

                                           OPINION
                                         Filing ID 15303956


        RBK Landscaping & Construction, Inc., has protested the District’s responsibility
determination of the awardee, Community Bridge, Inc., and the nonresponsibility determination
of RBK, regarding a solicitation to provide comprehensive landscape maintenance and
management services for approximately 450 acres of land at 72 recreational centers and facilities
in the District. The contracting officer determined RBK nonresponsible for failing to show inter
alia financial capacity, adequate staffing for the job, compliance with District tax laws, adequate
equipment to perform the work, and ability to obtain a surety bond. RBK argues that it has
adequate financial resources, staff, and equipment, and that it complies with District tax laws and
provided evidence that it could obtain a bond. We sustain the nonresponsibility determination on
the record presented, concluding that RBK has not demonstrated that the contracting officer’s
determination lacked a reasonable basis. The evidence in the record supporting Community
Bridge’s responsibility is unrebutted. Because the contracting officer did not violate either the
law or the terms of the solicitation, we deny the protest.

                                        BACKGROUND

        On January 22, 2007, the Office of Contracting and Procurement (“OCP”) issued in the
open market IFB No. DCHA-2007-B-0002, on behalf of the Department of Parks and Recreation
(“DPR”), for a contractor to provide comprehensive landscape maintenance and management
services for approximately 450 acres of land at 72 recreational centers and facilities in Wards 1
through 8. (Agency Report (“AR”) Ex. 3). Bidders were to bid fixed-unit prices that would
result in a requirements contract with total amounts based on estimated quantities of work. (AR
Ex. 3). The bid opening date was February 5, 2007. Six bidders responded with bids and OCP
performed an initial bid tabulation based on an evaluation of bid prices that was later determined
to be erroneous. The initial bid tabulation showed the following order of evaluated prices from
lowest to highest: Horton & Barber, IIU Consulting, Community Bridge, Inc., RBK
Landscaping, KC Home Improvement, and Turf Center Lawns. (AR at 3-4; AR Ex. 6). The
OCP contract specialist and the contracting officer’s technical representative made site visits to
the bidders’ facilities, including RBK’s facility. (AR at 4; AR Ex. 13).
                                               -2-               RBK Landscaping, CAB No. P-0753




       On February 9, 2007, OCP sent all bidders a letter requesting responsibility data. (AR
Exs. 13, 14). RBK responded to the request by furnishing a package consisting of approximately
23 pages. (AR Ex. 15). The RBK submission has no index and only partial indications of which
documents were meant to respond to the various categories of responsibility data requested by
the contracting officer. The RBK documentation is comprised of the following: insurance
information, a 1-page “Analysis of Operating Procedures” composed by its president, a 1-page
balance sheet as of October 31, 2006, a 2-page profit and loss statement for the period January
through October 2006, an inventory of equipment and vehicles, a list of current and past contract
work with the District Government, and a Dun & Bradstreet report.

        On February 21, 2007, the contracting officer determined Horton & Barber and IIU
nonresponsible. (AR at 4). On the same date, the contracting officer determined Community
Bridge a responsible bidder. (AR at 4; AR Ex. 10). On March 5, 2007, Horton & Barber
protested the District’s determination of its nonresponsibility. We denied that protest on May 25,
2007. On March 19, 2007, the District awarded the landscape and maintenance contract,
Contract No. DCHA-2007-C-0002, to Community Bridge.

        On March 26, 2007, RBK filed the instant protest. On or about March 30, 2007, OCP
discovered that section B, CLIN 3, of the solicitation contained an incomplete format for
calculating the total estimated amount of the bid extensions. When OCP revised the bid
tabulation based on properly extending the bid prices, the order of the lowest to the highest
bidders changed, with RBK becoming the third lowest bidder, followed by Turf Center and
Community Bridge (AR at 5-6), with the corrected evaluated prices and order as follows:

          Bidder                     Bid Price for Base         Evaluated Bid Price
                                     Year and Four
                                     Option Years
                                     (Estimated Amounts)
          1. Horton & Barber         $7,794,019.50              $6,858,737.16

          2. IIU Consulting          $10,217,403.85             $9,359,141.93

          3. RBK Landscaping         $11,771,969.58             $10,359,333.23
          Construction
          4. Turf Center Lawns       $12,200,900.00             $12,200,900.00

          5. Community Bridge        $13,385,668.60             $12,342,925.02

          6. KC Home                 $15,119,490.00             $14,907,817.14
          Improvement

(AR at 6). Because the contracting officer had previously determined Horton & Barber and IIU
nonresponsible, RBK became the low bidder if it was found responsible. On May 9, 2007,
however, the contracting officer determined RBK nonresponsible. (AR at 6; AR Ex. 9). Turf
Center withdrew its bid, leaving Community Bridge, the awardee, as the lowest responsible
                                                -3-              RBK Landscaping, CAB No. P-0753



bidder. (AR at 6; District’s May 21, 2007 Supplement to the Agency Report). The May 9
nonresponsibility determination provides in relevant part:

      1. Lack of Financial Capability - . . . . The requested information was analyzed
      by the OCP Cost Price Analyst. Based on the Financial Statement Analyses dated
      04/10/2007, attached to this D&F, the Contracting Officer determined that RBK
      does not have the financial capability for a project of this magnitude. Critical
      findings in this report include:

           •          The financial statements provided were for the ten months ended
                      10/31/06 and un-audited or reviewed. As such, they did not provide
                      a full year’s financial activity and are not current.
           •          According to RBK’s balance sheet, at 10/31/2006 they had only
                      $40,605 in cash. There was no additional information provided by
                      them regarding lines of credit or access to additional sources of
                      capital.
           •          The COTR for DPR has estimated that they will need a minimum of
                      60 days funds, approximately $300,000 in cash based on their bid
                      price for CLIN003 alone, and assuming an operating profit margin of
                      20%. Based on this, the bidder does not appear to have adequate
                      financing to absorb a contract of this size.

      2. Comply with Required Performance Schedule - . . . . The bidder’s response to
      the Contracting Officer’s request for information reflected notable discrepancies:
      According to RBK’s employment data (Schedule D), RBK currently has 28
      employees, while his listing of [current] employees attached to his First Source
      Employment Agreement shows 6 current employees. . . .
               ....

      4. Compliance with DC licensing and tax laws - . . . . As of 02/2/07, RBK was
      “not in compliance with the tax filing and payment requirements of the District of
      Columbia Unemployment Tax Laws.”

      5. Production Equipment, Supplies, and Facilities – . . . . The Contracting Officer
      and the Contract Specialist conducted a site visit of RBK on 02/10/07. RBK
      requested that the group travel to the site of one [of] its (non-LSDBE)
      subcontractors, Chapel Valley Landscaping in Woodbine, Maryland. At the site,
      RBK explained that the majority of the equipment belonged to the subcontractor,
      although he pointed out certain items that belonged to them. The Contracting
      Officer and Contract Specialist, using an equipment checklist provided by the
      COTR, did not see any vehicles, trucks or trailers on the premises. They cannot
      perform the contract without vehicles and trailers to transport equipment from
      Woodbine, Maryland to the District of Columbia. . . .

      6. Evidence of Obtaining a Performance Bond - The bidder provided no evidence
      that they were being given “favorable consideration for a surety bond”, as
      requested in the Contracting Officer’s letter dated 02/10/07.
                                                -4-                RBK Landscaping, CAB No. P-0753




(AR Ex. 9). Attached to the D&F is a February 28, 2007 tax verification response from the
Department of Employment Services indicating that RBK is not in compliance with the tax filing
or payment requirements of the District’s unemployment tax laws.

                                          DISCUSSION

       We exercise jurisdiction over this protest pursuant to D.C. Code § 2-309.03(a)(1).

        RBK argues that it has the financial capability to perform the contract, noting that it
performed the “same contract in 2006 without financial complications by employing a $350,000
working capital line of credit as needed to underwrite the District’s payment timing, which at
times was very delayed.” (Comments on Agency Report, at 1). Regarding staffing, RBK urges
that the reference to the reduced staffing in the First Source Agreement reflected its employment
“in the off season” and should not have been considered as a negative factor. Regarding
equipment and vehicles, RBK states that it offered the same items that it used in successfully
performing the 2006 contract. RBK states that it has timely paid its unemployment taxes and
timely filed its returns but has introduced no evidence that it was in tax compliance as of the date
of the determination of nonresponsibility. RBK points out that it had its bonding agent send a
bonding letter directly to OCP but there is no evidence in the record of that letter. Finally, RBK
argues that the contracting officer’s D&F of nonresponsibility is invalid because in the final line
of the document, the name “Unicorn Landscaping Services” is mentioned rather than RBK.

        We sustain the contracting officer’s determination that RBK did not demonstrate
adequate financial capacity to perform the contract. The financial statements were not current
and complete, rendering it impossible for the contracting officer to have a reasonable
understanding of the company’s financial position. For a contract of the size at issue here, the
contracting officer reasonably doubted the company’s ability to finance the significant work
required by the solicitation. On staffing and equipment, we see no legal error in the contracting
officer’s determination based on the meager record presented by RBK. The only evidence
submitted by RBK was that found in the package submitted to the contracting officer in response
to the responsibility data request. For the same reason, RBK has failed to rebut the findings and
determination by the contracting officer regarding the lack of a bonding letter. Argument by the
protester’s representative in RBK’s comments on the Agency Report does not constitute
evidence. Finally, the contracting officer’s reference to “Unicorn Landscaping Services” in the
final sentence of the D&F is simply a typographical error. The repeated references to RBK
throughout the D&F convincingly show that the nonresponsibility determination was directed to
RBK, not “Unicorn Landscaping Services.”

        RBK argues that Community Bridge, the awardee, should have been found
nonresponsible. The determination and findings of contractor responsibility, dated February 21,
2007, adequately support the contracting officer’s determination. Unsupported allegations by the
protester’s representative of poor past performance on the part of Community Bridge are
insufficient to rebut the determination.
                                                -5-               RBK Landscaping, CAB No. P-0753




                                        CONCLUSION

       RBK has not shown that the contracting officer’s determination of RBK’s
nonresponsibility violated law or the terms of the solicitation. We find that the record adequately
supports the findings of the contracting officer regarding RBK’s nonresponsibility and
Community Bridge’s responsibility. Accordingly, for the reasons discussed above, we deny
RBK’s protest.

       SO ORDERED.

DATED: June 20, 2007                                  /s/ Jonathan D. Zischkau
                                                      JONATHAN D. ZISCHKAU
                                                      Chief Administrative Judge

CONCURRING:

/s/ Warren J. Nash
WARREN J. NASH
Administrative Judge
