           DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD

PROTEST OF:

       Anchor Construction Corporation                       )
                                                             )      CAB No. P-0737
       Under Solicitation No. POAM-2006-B-003-AE             )

       For the Protester Anchor Construction Corporation: Leonard A. White, Esq.,
White & Horton. For the District of Columbia Government: Howard Schwartz, Esq.,
Senior Assistant Attorney General, and Talia Cohen, Esq., Assistant Attorney General.

       Opinion by Administrative Judge Warren J. Nash, with Chief Administrative
Judge Jonathan D. Zischkau, concurring.

            OPINION DENYING MOTION FOR RECONSIDERATION
                                     Filing ID 15481551

        Anchor Construction Corporation (“Anchor”) requests that the Board reconsider
its decision dated January 9, 2007, in which we sustained the District’s affirmative
responsibility determination of the awardee, Consys Engineering, Inc. (“Consys”).
Anchor asserts that the Board’s opinion contains an error of fact or law, namely, that the
Board misapprehended Anchor’s protest as alleging bad faith on the part of the District in
determining Consys responsible. In its motion for reconsideration, Anchor restates its
protest grounds, namely, that the Consys proposal did not adhere to definitive
responsibility criteria set forth in Section M.11.1 of the solicitation. That provision
requires the prime contractor to perform at least 50 percent of the on-site work with its
own work force.

        The Board set forth in its opinion the rule that because a responsibility
determination requires the contracting officer to exercise business judgment, and we
accord the contracting officer broad discretion in this determination, the Board will not
reverse an affirmative determination of responsibility unless the protester shows that the
determination was made in bad faith or lacked a reasonable basis, or that the bidder failed
to adhere to definitive responsibility criteria. Anchor mistakenly implies that we simply
addressed the bad faith portion of the rule. A careful reading of our decision shows we
addressed all three portions, starting with whether the awardee complied with the
definitive responsibility criteria and whether the determination lacked a reasonable basis.
We concluded that the contracting officer’s responsibility determination was adequately
supported by the record. Further, we concluded that “there is no evidence in the record
persuading us that the contracting officer erred in his determination” that “Consys [could]
perform at least 50 percent of the onsite work with its own workforce.” Anchor
presented no evidence in the protest to persuade us otherwise and its motion for
reconsideration fails to point to any evidence in the record supporting its assertion. After
addressing these first two portions of the rule, we then noted that there was no evidence
                                            -2
                                             -
                                                        Anchor Construction Corp., CAB No. P-0737


of bad faith to support overturning the District’s affirmative responsibility determination
of Consys.

       Anchor has not shown that the Board committed an error of fact or law in its
opinion. Accordingly, we deny Anchor’s motion for reconsideration.

       SO ORDERED.

DATED: July 6, 2007                                  /s/ Warren J. Nash
                                                     WARREN J. NASH
                                                     Administrative Judge



CONCURRING:

/s/ Jonathan D. Zischkau
JONATHAN D. ZISCHKAU
Chief Administrative Judge
