                           GOVERNMENT OF THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA
                                 CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD

PROTEST OF:

FARBER SPECIALTY VEHICLES                              )
7052 Americana Parkway                                 )       CAB No. P-0721
Reynoldsburg, Ohio, 43068                              )
                                                       )
Under RFP No. POKT-2005-B-0065-LV                      )

      For the Protester, Farber Specialty Vehicles: Ken Farber, CEO, pro se. For the District
Government: Howard S. Schwartz, Esq., and Talia S. Cohen, Esq., Assistant Attorneys General.

       Opinion by Administrative Judge Warren J. Nash, with Chief Administrative Judge Jonathan
D. Zischkau, concurring.

                                              OPINION
                                      Lexis-Nexis Filing ID 10737596


        Protester Farber Specialty Vehicles (“Farber”) alleges in its protest that the District
improperly awarded a contract for a mobile health unit to a bidder that submitted a bid with a higher
price. The District in its Agency Report asserts that the District properly awarded the contract to
Lifeline Shelter Systems, Inc. (“Lifeline”).

                                          BACKGROUND

       On June 2, 2005, District of Columbia Office of Contracting and Procurement (“OCP”), on
behalf of the District of Columbia Department of Public Works (“DPW”) Fleet Management
Administration (“FMA”) and the Department of Health (“DOH”), issued IFB POKT-2005-B-0065-
LV for purchase of a Mobile Medical Clinic Unit (“mobile health unit”) to be delivered no more
than 150 days after the date of award. (Agency Report (“AR”) Ex. 1). On June 6, 2005, OCP issued
an amendment to the IFB that clarified the bid due date of July 6, 2005. Both Farber and Lifeline
submitted nonresponsive bids. OCP then cancelled the solicitation and proceeded to complete the
procurement process through negotiation. (AR Ex. 3). OCP revised the solicitation and reissued it to
Farber and Lifeline. (AR Ex. 4). The reissued solicitation required offerors to insert the earliest
delivery date that offerors could deliver to the District the mobile health unit rather than mandate a
150 day delivery date. (AR Ex. 4).

       Revised solicitation section L.1.2 stated that the District intended to award the contract to the
responsive and responsible bidder who had the lowest evaluated bid price taking into consideration
the bidder’s proposed delivery date. (AR Ex. 4). On August 26, 2005, Farber and Lifeline
submitted new bids. (AR Ex. 5). Farber offered to sell the mobile health unit to the District for
$282,000, and to deliver the unit to the District in 210 days. (AR Ex. 5). Lifeline offered to sell the
mobile health unit to the District for $298,880, and to deliver the unit to the District in 150 days.
(AR Ex. 5). On November 9, 2005, the contracting officer awarded the contract to Lifeline after
determining that DOH had an urgent need for the mobile health unit for the delivery of critical health
                                             2
                                                                                  Farber, CAB No. P-0721


services to communities that do not have adequate or accessible health facilities. (AR Ex. 6). On
November 15, 2005, the District awarded the contract to Lifeline. (AR Ex. 7). On November 15,
2005, DPW notified Farber of the award to Lifeline. (AR Ex. 7). On November 25, 2005, Farber
filed its protest with the Board. On December 19, 2005, the District filed its determination and
finding to proceed with award notwithstanding the protest. In the D&F to proceed, the District set
forth its urgent need to proceed with contract award and performance as quickly as possible. The
protester did not challenge the D&F.

                                             DISCUSSION

        Farber apparently asserts in its protest that the District should have awarded the contract to
Farber since Farber’s price was lower than Lifeline’s price. The District responds that the District
properly awarded the contract to Lifeline since the Contracting Officer reasonably determined that
Lifeline’s offer was in the best interest of the District when considering both the price and the
proposed delivery date. We conclude that the District properly awarded the contract to Lifeline.

         The District in its Agency Report sets forth the Board’s standard of review regarding the
contracting officer’s evaluation decision. This Board examines the record to determine whether the
decision was reasonable and in accord with the evaluation criteria set forth in the solicitation.
Health Right Inc., et al., CAB Nos. P-0507, P-0510, and P-0511, Oct. 15, 1997, 45 D.C. Reg. 8612,
8635. This Board will also examine the record to determine whether there were any violations of
procurement laws or regulations. As we stated in Health Right: “Considering the totality of the
record, evaluations must be reasonable and must bear a rational relationship to the announced
criteria upon which competing offers are to be selected.” 45 D.C. Reg. at 8635.

       By affidavit dated December 15, 2005, the contracting officer stated that the District’s health
and safety needs outweighed Farber’s lower price. (AR Ex. 8). The contracting officer determined
that awarding the contract to Lifeline, who promised to deliver the mobile health unit to the District
sixty days earlier than Farber, was in the best interest of the District. (AR Ex. 8). The District’s
D&F to proceed set forth the District’s urgent need to award the contract. (D&F to Proceed dated
December 19, 2005), and Farber did not challenge the D&F.

       Accordingly, we determine that the contracting officer did not violate law or regulations in
awarding the contract to Lifeline. We deny the protest.


        SO ORDERED.

DATE:          March 7, 2006                         /s/ Warren J. Nash
                                                    WARREN J. NASH
                                                    Administrative Judge

CONCURRING:


/s/ Jonathan D. Zischkau
JONATHAN D. ZISCHKAU
Chief Administrative Judge
