                DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD


PROTEST OF:

KIDD INTERNATIONAL HOME CARE, INC.                              )
                                                                ) CAB No. P-0760
Under RFP No. DCKV-2007-R-0001                                  )

       For the Protester, Kidd International Home Care, Inc.: Kiyo D. Oden, Esq., The Oden Firm,
P.C. For the District of Columbia Government: Howard Schwartz, Esq., Senior Assistant Attorney
General, and Talia S. Cohen, Esq., Assistant Attorney General.

      Opinion by Chief Administrative Judge Jonathan D. Zischkau, with Administrative Judge
Warren J. Nash, concurring.

                                              OPINION
                                           Filing ID 16574962


       Kidd International Home Care, Inc., protests the District’s award of a contract to Industrial
Bank to perform ticket payment, lockbox, and secondary ticket collection services for the
Department of Motor Vehicles (“DMV”). Kidd International contends that the contracting officer
(1) misled it during its discussions regarding changes in key personnel, (2) failed to properly
evaluate Industrial Bank’s proposal for price realism, and (3) improperly evaluated and scored the
proposals relating to debt collection strategy and past performance. We conclude that the
contracting officer’s evaluation and selection did not violate the terms of the solicitation or District
law. Accordingly, we deny the protest.

                                          BACKGROUND

       On July 28, 2006, OCP issued RFP No. DCKV-2007-R-0001 (“RFP”), on behalf of the
Department of Motor Vehicles, to procure the services of a contractor to provide ticket payment,
lockbox, and secondary ticket collection services for a base period of two years, with three one-year
option periods. (Agency Report (“AR”) Ex. 1 and Ex. 8, § 4.1). Section C.2.1 of the RFP (AR Ex.
1) provides:

       The District requires this contract in order to support the ability of customers to mail
       payments for photo enforcement, parking and moving [violation] tickets issued
       within the District, and to support the ability of customers to pay tickets pursuant to
       secondary collection activity. The mail payments lockbox function includes the
       receipt, processing and deposit of payments, and transmission of payment data to the
       ticket system. The secondary ticket collection function includes the design and
       pursuit of a collection strategy for tickets that have been assigned for secondary
       collections, customer service pursuant to incoming correspondence and phone calls,
       and transmission of payment data to the ticket system. A ticket system and ancillary
       support services including primary noticing, mailing and back-office processing, is
       being separately solicited.
                                                 -2-      Kidd International Home Care, CAB No. P-0760


       With regard to pricing, section C.2.6 of the RFP provides:

       Contract pricing shall consist of a fixed price per payment processed and updated by
       the lockbox, and a contingency fee based as a percentage of the amount collected for
       secondary collections, with certain fee eligibility exclusions.

        Between July 28, 2006, and October 6, 2006, OCP issued six amendments. (AR Ex. 2, Ex 8,
§ 4.2). Section M of the RFP identifies four general evaluation criteria and maximum points for
each: Technical Approach (40 points) consisting of a work plan (10 points), management plan (10
points), quality assurance plan (10 points), and responsiveness to the stated requirements (10 points);
Experience and Past Performance (15 points), consisting of past experience in providing lockbox
and collection services (10 points) and quality of references (5 points); Quality and Retention of
Personnel (15 points), consisting of experience managing high volume, production oriented lockbox
and collection services at the scale described in the RFP (5 points), ability to retain employees (5
points), and project management experience of key personnel (5 points); and Price (30 points).

        The RFP closed on October 13, 2006, with four offerors responding: Industrial Bank, Kidd
International, and two other contractors who were later determined not to be within the competitive
range. A technical evaluation panel (“TEP”) was assigned to review, evaluate, and score the
technical proposals. On November 14, 2006, the TEP submitted to the contracting officer a report of
its technical evaluation of the initial proposals, containing scoring of proposals pursuant to the RFP
evaluation criteria and detailed comments of the relative strengths and weaknesses of the proposals.
(AR Ex. 5, Ex. 8, § 5.2). The TEP’s consensus technical score for Kidd International was 36 points
while Industrial Bank’s was 32 points. The four point difference resulted from Kidd receiving 20
points for technical approach while Industrial Bank received 16 points. The total scores for
experience and past performance and quality and retention of personnel were the same for the two
proposals. (AR Ex. 8, § 5.3). The contracting officer’s initial evaluation of the proposals resulted in
scoring of 40 points for Kidd and 36 points for Industrial Bank, reflecting a similar 4 point
differential based on technical approach favoring Kidd. (AR Ex. 8).

        The contracting agency prepared a detailed list of questions for Kidd and a separate list of
questions for Industrial Bank on January 10, 2007, in preparation for discussions held by the
contracting officer with the offerors on January 12, 2007. (AR Ex. 4; Ex. 8, § 13.2). As a result of
the discussions, the contracting officer requested best and final offers (“BAFOs”) including
responses to the written questions with submissions due on January 22, 2007. (AR Ex. 8, § 13.4).
Both offerors responded with BAFOs and they were evaluated by the TEP which issued an
evaluation report dated January 30, 2007. (AR Ex. 5, Ex. 8, § 13.6). The TEP advised the
contracting officer that because of a substantial strengthening in Industrial Bank’s work plan,
management plan, and quality assurance plan, as well as an overall strengthening of its
responsiveness to the RFP requirements, the TEP increased its score of Industrial Bank to 41 points,
an increase of 9 points. On the other hand, the TEP evaluation of Kidd International resulted in its
score rising by only one point to a new consensus score of 37 points, reflecting a one point increase
under the project management experience of key personnel subfactor. (AR Ex. 5).

       The contracting officer had price analysts evaluate the cost and pricing of each of the
                                                 -3-      Kidd International Home Care, CAB No. P-0760


proposals. The first price analysis report, dated December 1, 2006, indicates a number of cost and
pricing issues in both proposals. The contracting agency sought clarification from the offerors in the
written questions and oral discussions. (AR Ex. 3). Following the BAFOs which incorporated the
written responses, another price analysis was conducted resulting in a price analysis report dated
January 30, 2007, analyzing the cost and pricing data of Kidd International and Industrial Bank.
(AR Ex. 6.). In this second price analysis report, the analyst indicates that Kidd International had an
unexplained “gap” of $1,627,119 (Kidd’s costs did not support its BAFO price of $18,727,509), and
that Kidd had an excessive profit of 27 percent. (AR Ex. 6, at 8, 12).

         As a result of the price analysis report, the contracting officer requested a second round of
BAFOs to address price issues, with responses due on February 9, 2007. In the second round of
BAFOs, Kidd’s revised offer was $16,717,244, while Industrial Bank (which did not submit a
revised offer) held its price to $15,647,607. The contracting officer’s independent assessment of the
(1) technical proposals, (2) BAFOs, (3) TEP evaluations, and (4) prices resulted in the following
total technical and price scores: Kidd received 77 points, and Industrial Bank received 80 points.
(AR Ex. 8, §13.7). In the Business Clearance Memorandum (AR Ex. 8, §13.8.1), the contracting
officer states:

       In spite of the offerors’ similarities in capabilities, Industrial Bank provided a
       proposal that met the requirements of the RFP with a price of approximately 5%
       lower than the next lowest offeror. The merits of each are summarized below:

       A. Industrial Bank, NA processes approximately two (2) million checks per year is
       about twice the volume required under this contract and two (2) million now
       managed through lockbox services. Industrial offers the ability for customers to pay
       tickets at any Industrial Bank site, a value added feature. Also, the bank transition to
       the Check-21 environment four (4) years prior to the Check-21 legislative mandate,
       minimizing potential check imaging issues.

       B. Kidd International Home Care, Inc. ranked second, brings the experience of ACS
       State and Local Solutions as a subcontractor. ACS is the current prime contractor
       providing lockbox and collection services of which Kidd International is a
       subcontractor.

        By Determination and Finding for Price Reasonableness dated March 16, 2007, the
contracting officer determined Industrial Bank’s prices to be reasonable. (AR Ex. 9). By
Determination and Finding for Contractor Responsibility dated March 15, 2007, the contracting
officer determined Industrial Bank to be a responsible contractor. Accordingly, after Council
approval, on June 13, 2007, the contracting officer awarded Industrial Bank contract number
DCKV-2007-C-0001. (AR Ex. 10). On June 28, 2007, OCP held a procurement debriefing for
Kidd. On July 13, 2007, Kidd filed its protest.
                                                  -4-      Kidd International Home Care, CAB No. P-0760




                                            DISCUSSION

        We exercise jurisdiction pursuant to D.C. Code § 2-309.03(a)(1).

        Kidd International first argues that it was “unreasonably misled” by OCP during its contract
discussions “to believe that certain changes should be made in its personnel proposal to increase its
chances of receiving the contract award although the agency had no real intent to do anything but
downgrade Kidd’s personnel proposal regardless of any changes which it later made in its BAFO
responses.” (Protest, at 6). First, the record simply does not support the allegation that “the agency
had no real intent to do anything but downgrade Kidd’s personnel proposal . . . .” On the contrary,
the contracting agency had identified as a weakness in Kidd’s proposal that the proposed manager
for collection strategy would commit 50 percent of her time to the contract but this same person was
identified in another District contract as devoting 100 percent of her time to the other contract. In its
BAFO, Kidd replaced this proposed manager with another who would be dedicated full time to the
contract. The TEP did not downgrade Kidd for this change but rather increased its score from 2
points to 3 points. We find no merit in this protest ground.

        Next, Kidd alleges that the contracting officer failed to properly evaluate the reasonableness
of Industrial Bank’s proposed costs, did not perform a price realism analysis, and improperly
downgraded Kidd’s proposal based upon a $1 million price decrease from its first to its second
BAFO. Kidd cites 27 DCMR §§ 1614.2 and 1618.2, the latter of which provides that the contracting
officer “shall evaluate the cost estimate or price, not only to determine whether it is reasonable, but
also to determine the offeror’s understanding of the work and ability to perform the contract.” More
particularly, Kidd states that it “strains credulity” to believe that Industrial Bank could perform the
contract at a lower price than Kidd when Kidd had substantial experience working on the existing
contract with the incumbent contractor.

        We have carefully reviewed the three cost and price analyses prepared by the contracting
agency and the determination and findings for contractor responsibility and conclude that the record
does not support finding that the contracting officer violated District procurement law or regulation.
 The contracting officer had detailed cost and pricing analyses prepared and this data was considered
in the evaluation of the proposals and in the selection decision. The determination for price
reasonableness indicates that Industrial Bank’s $0.69 unit price for lockbox services is lower than
Kidd’s $0.85 price but nearly matches the $0.68 unit price in the incumbent contract. Meanwhile,
the percentage of collection price of Industrial Bank (19.9 percent) is nearly identical to that of Kidd
International (19.8 percent). Although Kidd claims that the contracting officer unreasonably
downgraded its second BAFO due to a price reduction, there is no support in the record for that
assertion. The contracting officer agreed with the TEP that Kidd’s technical score increased by one
point from its initial proposal to its BAFOs. There was no downgrade in its technical evaluation
from its first to second BAFO. In sum, we discern no basis for sustaining the protest on the
reasonableness of Industrial Bank’s pricing or responsibility.

        For its third ground of protest, Kidd alleges that the contracting officer unequally evaluated
the technical proposals in that Industrial Bank’s outgoing call plan for collecting debts was more
                                                -5-      Kidd International Home Care, CAB No. P-0760


favorable than Kidd’s plan. Industrial Bank proposed making the outgoing telephone calls for
secondary debt collections at an earlier point in the collections cycle than proposed by Kidd. Kidd
argues that because any plan for telephone calls made to collect District debts must first be approved
by the Mayor, “it would have been speculative for OCP to presume that either outgoing call
approach . . . was better than the other because only the Mayor can ultimately make that
determination.” (Protest, at 13). The District responds that it is aware of no legal authority for
Kidd’s contention that the Mayor must approve the outgoing call plans. Even if there were a
required Mayoral approval, we see no basis for concluding that differences between the call plans
could not be considered in evaluating the strengths and weaknesses of the proposals under the RFP’s
evaluation criteria. The TEP found that Kidd’s proposal provided incomplete information regarding
the commitment of resources and phone collection strategy. While Kidd provided some additional
information in its BAFO, the overall evaluation did not change. In contrast, the evaluators found
that Industrial Bank had proposed a “robust” telephone collections strategy with supporting statistics
from other contracts. We find no basis for sustaining the third protest ground.

        In its fourth basis for protest, Kidd contends that OCP gave no meaningful consideration to
its “extensive experience under the incumbent contract.” (Protest, at 14). Kidd states that its
experience was “arbitrarily ignored by the agency by effectively opting to award the contract to
Industrial Bank having no comparable levels of experience . . . .” (Id.).

         In her Business Clearance Memorandum, the contracting officer clearly indicates that Kidd’s
experience was considered a strength. Indeed, of the 6 strengths listed, 5 directly relate to Kidd’s
experience under the incumbent contract. For example, the first two strengths are as follows:
“[Kidd] is teaming with entities that are experienced in ticket processing and collections. Kidd, DCI
and ACS are already performing on the District's ticket processing and collections contract. . . . A
relatively painless transition would be likely. Lockbox, call center and collection noticing
procedures are already established and fully tested.” (AR Ex. 8, BCM at 11). Further, in her source
selection determination, quoted infra, the contracting officer noted that Kidd would bring the
experience of performing on the incumbent contract. (AR Ex. 8, § 13.8.1). We conclude from the
record that the contracting officer and the TEP were well aware of and did consider Kidd’s
experience on the incumbent contract. The record also indicates that Industrial Bank had
considerable relevant experience. We are unable to conclude that the contracting officer’s
evaluation and scoring were unreasonable or arbitrary. In sum, we discern no violation of the law or
the terms of the RFP in the evaluation and scoring of the experience and past performance criterion.
In its comments on the Agency Report, Kidd raises additional grounds for protest in its discussion of
the past performance issues (see Comments on Agency Report, at 6-7), but we find no merit in these
additional allegations.

                                          CONCLUSION

        Based on the protest record, we conclude that the contracting officer violated neither the law
nor the terms of the RFP in her evaluation of proposals and in the selection of Industrial Bank for
award. Accordingly, we deny Kidd International’s protest.
                         -6-     Kidd International Home Care, CAB No. P-0760




      SO ORDERED.

DATED: October 5, 2007         /s/ Jonathan D. Zischkau
                               JONATHAN D. ZISCHKAU
                               Chief Administrative Judge


CONCURRING:



/s/ Warren J. Nash
WARREN J. NASH
Administrative Judge
