                           GOVERNMENT OF THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA
                           CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD

Protest of:
                                                     )
B&B SECURITY CONSULTANTS, INC.                       )       CAB No. P-0708
                                                     )
Under RFP No. POAM-2004-R-0015-DW                    )


       For the Protester, B&B Security Consultants, Inc.: Robert A. Klimek Jr., Esq., Klimek,
Kolodney & Cassale, P.C. For the Government: Howard Schwartz, Esq., and Jon N. Kulish,
Esq., Assistant Attorneys General.

       Opinion by Administrative Judge Matthew S. Watson together with Chief Administrative
Judge Jonathan D. Zischkau, and Administrative Judge Warren J. Nash, concurring.


                                          OPINION
                                  (LexisNexis Filing ID 6225689)

        B&B Security Consultants, Inc. timely filed a protest against award to Hawk One
Security, Inc., of Contract No. POAM-2004-D-0015-DW for citywide security services at
District owned and leased facilities that are open to the public. B&B asserts that the award is
improper on three bases: (1) while the RFP explicitly stated that the District would make four
distinct determinations for each of the four aggregate award groups, the District made only one
such determination and awarded a single contract to Hawk One. (Count I); (2) the District had
discussions/negotiations with Hawk One after the receipt of Best and Final Offers and held no
such discussions with the other offerors (Count II); and (3) the District’s evaluation of B&B's
proposal was unreasonable, arbitrary, capricious and irrational (Count III). The District denies
B&B’s allegations asserting that they are not supported by the facts. The Board agrees with the
District and denies the protest.


                                      BACKGROUND


        Solicitation No. POAM-2004-R-0015-DW was issued August 4, 2004, requesting initial
proposals by September 7, 2004, from small business enterprises. The solicitation requested
offers for 4 aggregate award groups and provided for evaluation and award to take place in a
three step process:
                                                          -2-         B&B Security Consultants, Inc. CAB No. P-0708



First, a technical evaluation by an evaluation team1 based on the following criteria contained in
the solicitation:


           The technical evaluation criteria are outlined below in descending order of
           importance. Selection of an offeror for contract award will be based on an
           evaluation of proposals against the following factors:

           M.5 TECHNICAL CRITERIA 0-60 POINTS

                    M.5.1 EXPERIENCE AND PAST PERFORMANCE 0-40 POINTS
                    Offeror’s shall detail its experience with providing security services as
                    required in the RFP. See Paragraph L.3.1.

                    M.5.2 MANAGEMENT CAPABILITY 0-20 POINTS
                    Offerors shall submit a management and technical plan that will detail its
                    understanding of the requirements and its approach to successfully provide
                    services to satisfy the District’s requirements. See Paragraph L.3.2.

Second, a price evaluation as follows:

                    M.5.3 PRICE CRITERIA 0-40 POINTS
                    The price evaluation will be objective. The offeror with the lowest price
                    for the base plus option years will receive the maximum points. All other
                    proposals will receive a proportionately lower total score. The
                    following formula will be used to determine each offeror's evaluated price
                    score:

                    Lowest price proposal x 40 = Evaluated Price of proposal being evaluated
                    price score

           In addition, up to 12 points could be added for local, disadvantaged, resident and
           enterprise zone businesses (¶ M.10.5), for a possible total of 112 points. Based


1
    ¶ M.1.1 of the solicitation provides:

           The contract will be awarded to the responsible offeror whose offer is most advantageous to the
           District, based upon the evaluation criteria specified below. Thus, while the points in the
           evaluation criteria indicate their relative importance, the total scores will not necessarily be
           determinative of the award. Rather, the total scores will guide the District in making an intelligent
           award decision based upon the evaluation criteria.

           Upon receipt of proposals, an evaluation team composed of representatives of PSD and such other
           persons as the CO may designate will evaluate the proposals. Every member will evaluate the
           proposals based on the evaluation criteria and assign a numerical rating. The CO shall make a
           substantive independent evaluation of the proposals and shall review the ratings assigned by the
           evaluation team. The CO shall make a selection decision based on the CO’s independent judgment
           of the relative merits of the competing proposals.
                                                      -3-        B&B Security Consultants, Inc. CAB No. P-0708



        on the technical and price evaluation the offerors shall be ranked based on the
        evaluation scores.

Third, award shall be made as follows:

        M.2.2 After the District has determined the highest scored offeror for each
              aggregate award group, the District will then determine whether that
              offeror is a responsible contractor for that aggregate award group. For
              each determination of responsibility for each aggregate award group, the
              District will consider any impact on that offeror’s responsibility of any
              awards to that offeror under other aggregate award groups.


        Nine offerors submitted timely proposals of which three were from entities not qualifying
as small businesses. The evaluation team reviewed and ranked the proposals after which best
and final offers (“BAFOs”) were requested from 5 qualified proposers and evaluated2 by the
evaluation team. After completion of the technical evaluation, the technical point score was
combined with preference points and the price point score and ranked by the combined score.
The combined technical, preference and price evaluation resulted in Hawk One being ranked first
for each award group and B&B being ranked last.3


                                                DISCUSSION


        Evaluation of individual aggregate award groups

        The Protester asserts that the District violated the terms of the solicitation by utilizing a
single technical evaluation of each BAFO to rank the proposals for each of the 4 aggregate
groups, rather than making a separate technical evaluation of each proposal for each aggregate
group taking into account whether the proposer was awarded earlier aggregate groups. The
Board disagrees. The technical criteria in the solicitation are generic and identically applicable
to each of the 4 aggregate award groups. None of the technical criteria relate to capacity which
would cause different evaluation scores depending on the aggregate groups awarded to a
particular offeror. The technical evaluation is essentially a determination of responsiveness.
Evaluation of capacity taking into account award of previous aggregate groups is a separate


2
    Protester questioned whether the BAFOs were actually evaluated (Reply to Agency Report, 4) since the
attachment to the Business Clearance Memorandum (“BCM”) (AR Ex. 10f), purporting to report the BAFO
evaluation scores, appears to show the evaluation scores after the BAFOs unchanged from the initial scores. The
attachment is apparently erroneous. The text of the BCM shows the revised scores resulting from the BAFOs for
each proposal. (§ 13.8). The BAFO technical scores increased between 1 and 5 points for each of the proposals,
except the protester’s proposal for which the evaluation was unchanged. (§13.6).
3
  In the evaluation, B&B was granted 9 preference points. B&B contends that it is entitled to 12 preference points
as a local, disadvantaged, resident business located in an enterprise zone. Since B&B’s point score was nearly 20
points below the next lowest rated proposal, correction would not change the ranking.
                                               -4-       B&B Security Consultants, Inc. CAB No. P-0708



determination of responsibility. Dental Benefits Providers, Inc., CAB No. P-0623, Dec. 1, 2000,
49 D.C. Reg. 3234.

        The language of the solicitation is clear. The evaluation criteria make no distinction as to
aggregate groups. (¶ M.5). This constitutes the first phase of consideration of proposals. The
solicitation directs consideration of capacity in the second phase of the consideration of
proposals. “After the District has determined the highest scored offeror for each aggregate
award group, the District will then determine whether that offeror is a responsible contractor for
that aggregate award group. For each determination of responsibility for each aggregate award
group, the District will consider any impact on that offeror’s responsibility of any awards to that
offeror under other aggregate award groups.” (¶ M.2.2). It is therefore clear that the same
technical evaluation is intended to be applied for each offeror to each aggregate group. The
application of the technical scores is no different than the award of preference points. An offeror
who is in a disadvantaged category for one aggregate award group is similarly in a disadvantaged
category for all other aggregate award groups.

        The District appropriately followed the award procedures set out in the solicitation by
making a single technical evaluation applicable to all 4 aggregate groups and considering
capacity only with regard to responsibility. The contracting officer made a determination that
Hawk One has capacity to perform all 4 aggregate groups together. (AR Ex. 10g). Implicit in
that determination is a determination for each aggregate group sequentially that Hawk One has
capacity to perform the subject aggregate group together with each previous aggregate group
awarded. Upon that determination, the solicitation mandates that all four aggregate groups be
awarded to Hawk One.


       Improper discussions with Hawk One


       B&B’s assertion that the District preferentially conducted further negotiations with Hawk
One after receipt of the BAFOs is not supported by the evidence B&B cites. B&B asserts that
because Hawk One solicited B&B employees on May 2, 2005, to work for Hawk One on the
new contract, prior to the award of the contract, Hawk One must have improperly had prior
knowledge of the award. (Complaint, 6-7). The record indicates that the contract was deemed
approved by the Council on May 9, 2005. (AR Ex. 5). To have been deemed approved, the
contract must have been submitted to the Council by April 29 (D.C. Code § 1-204.51(b) (2)), and
the District’s intent to award to Hawk One would therefore have been public record prior to May
2, 2005. The fact that Hawk One was aware that it was in line for award of all 4 award groups
on May 2, 2005 does not indicate that there was any improper communication.

        In its reply to the Agency Report, B&B further notes that Hawk One submitted a
“funding letter” dated January 14, 2005 (AR Ex. 10(g)), well after submission of the BAFOs
indicating further impermissable negotiations with Hawk One after receipt of its final offer.
(Reply, 6). Funding capacity is an element of responsibility, not of responsiveness. Financial
resources were not included in the solicitation’s technical criteria, but rather in the criteria for
determining responsibility. Section L.17 provides:
                                               -5-       B&B Security Consultants, Inc. CAB No. P-0708



       STANDARDS OF RESPONSIBILITY

       The prospective Contractor must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the District the
       capability in all respects to perform fully the contract requirements, therefore, the
       prospective Contractor must submit the documentation listed below, within five
       (5) days of the request by the District.

       L.17.1 Furnish evidence of adequate financial resources, credit or the ability to
       obtain such resources as required during the performance of the contract.

Documentation of responsibility may be obtained after receipt of offers. (Fort Myer Construction
Corp., CAB No. P-0685, May 5, 2004; 27 DCMR § 2204.2). The receipt of the funding letter
after submission of BAFOs was not improper.


       Evaluation of B&B’s proposal


        Lastly B&B contends that the evaluation was “unreasonable, capricious, irrational and
arbitrary.” As support for this contention B&B cites 3 areas that the evaluation was incorrect.
B&B asserts that, although it was entitled to 12 preference points as a Local Business Enterprise,
Disadvantaged Business Enterprise, located in an Enterprise zone, and District resident owned, it
was only awarded 9 preference points. (Reply, 5). B&B asserts that the contracting officer’s
narrative in the Business Clearance Memorandum erroneously fails to recognize that B&B’s
BAFO submitted an additional reference bringing the number of references to the required 5
references. (Reply, 7). In addition, B&B asserts that it was the lowest priced offeror, yet did not
receive award of any award group. (Complaint, 8). Specifically, B&B asserts:

       that it was prejudiced by the determination that it was only in the competitive
       range for aggregate award group 4. For instance, there was little difference
       between aggregate award group 3 and 4, and B&B had a price for aggregate
       award group 3 that was $2,439,611.95 lower that the award made to Hawk One.
       (A.R.; Ex. 10(b)) The contracting officer was required to make an independent
       determination and findings for each aggregate award group. Had this been done,
       B&B’s significantly lower price would have offset Hawk One’s higher technical
       score as being in the best interest of the District.

(Reply, 7)

        For purposes of this protest, the Board accepts each of the allegations concerning the
evaluations. Nevertheless, the protest must still be denied. Following the precedents of the
Comptroller General, we "will not sustain a protest unless the protester demonstrates a
reasonable possibility that it was prejudiced by the agency's actions, that is, unless the protester
demonstrates that, but for the agency's actions, it would have had a substantial chance of
receiving the award." McDonald-Bradley, B-270126, 96-1 Comp. Gen. Proc. Dec. ¶54; see also
Statistica, Inc. v. Christopher, 102 F.3d 1577 (Fed. Cir. 1996).
                                              -6-       B&B Security Consultants, Inc. CAB No. P-0708



        B&B’s total technical score allowing 12, rather than 9 preference points, would have
been 29. (BCM § 13.8). Hawk One had a technical score, including 9 preference points, of 62.5,
or a difference of 33.5. (Id.). The maximum price point difference between B&B and Hawk One
was 1 point. Thus, the respective total point scores combining technical, preference and price
scores were B&B 69 and Hawk One 101.5. There is no reasonable possibility that had the
contracting officer realized that B&B submitted an additional reference, its technical score would
have nearly tripled to overcome Hawk’s 32.5 point advantage.

       The protest is denied.



July 18, 2005                                                     /s/ Matthew S. Watson
                                                            Administrative Judge


       /s/ Jonathan D. Zischkau
Chief Administrative Judge


      /s/ Warren J. Nash
Administrative Judge
