           DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD

PROTEST OF:

       Camille Howe Cleaning Service                           )
                                                               )       CAB No. P-0768
       Under IFB No: RM-08-B-049                               )

                                         OPINION
                                     (Filing ID 19286433)

        For the Protester, Camille Howe Cleaning Service: Camille Howe, pro se. For the
District of Columbia Government: Howard Schwartz, Esq., Talia Sassoon Cohen, Esq.,
Assistant Attorneys General.

       Opinion by Administrative Judge Warren J. Nash, with Chief Administrative
Judge Jonathan D. Zischkau, concurring.


        Camille Howe Cleaning Service (“Camille Howe”) filed a protest of an award on
January 7, 2008. Ms. Howe argues that the District of Columbia Department of Mental
Health (“DMH”) awarded the contract to a nonresponsive bidder under IFB No. RM-08-
B-049 (“IFB”) in violation of applicable statutes and regulations. Camille Howe claims
that the awardee (Marcellus Cobb) failed to attend a mandatory site visit, rendering the
bid nonresponsive. The District submitted an unrebutted affidavit stating that the
awardee did attend the site visit. In any event, the failure of a bidder to attend a site visit
is not a matter of responsiveness. Accordingly, we deny the protest.

                                     BACKGROUND

        OCP issued the IFB on October 26, 2007, after the cancellation of a previous IFB
on September 27, 2007. (Agency Report, Ex. 4). The IFB for the fixed unit price contract
required the prospective contractor to provide cleaning services at five Community
Services Facilities seven days a week, including holidays. The IFB set forth a contract
base term of one year with the possibility of four one-year options.

        Camille Howe submitted its response to the IFB on November 16, 2007. Two
other prospective contractors, Marcellus Cobb and Building Services, also submitted
responses. The bid tabulation sheet (Agency Report, Ex. 3) sets forth the ranking of the
three prospective contractors after tabulation of their bid prices. Camille Howe’s prices
for the contract are the highest prices of the three bidders in the base year and in three out
of the four option years. Camille Howe filed its protest on January 7, 2008. In the
Agency Report, the District submitted an affidavit of the contracting officer, Samuel J.
Feinberg, indicating that the awardee in fact attended the mandatory site visit. (Agency
Report, Ex. 7). By Determination and Findings to Proceed (“D&F”) dated January 9,
2008, DMH determined that it had a compelling need to proceed with contract award,
                                            -2-                Camille Howe, CAB No. P-0768


despite the protest. On January 11, 2008, the Chief Procurement Officer (“CPO”) signed
the Determination and Findings to Proceed with Award pending decision on the protest.

         On January 26, 2008, the protester filed a “Rebuttal to Incorrect Facts Contained
in the Determination & Finding to Proceed with Performance While Protest is Pending.”
The Board denies the protester’s challenge to the D&F to proceed. There is no question
that providing for cleaning services at the facilities is a compelling and urgent
requirement of the government. In the D&F, the CPO sets forth the District’s compelling
need to proceed with contract award, because any disruption of cleaning services at the
facilities could present health and safety risks to the public and to the staff who provide
services to the patients.

                                      DISCUSSION

        We exercise jurisdiction pursuant to D.C. Code § 2-309.03(a)(1).

        In the protest, Howe argues that the other bidders submitted nonresponsive bids
because those bidders did not attend the mandatory site visit required by the IFB. OCP
responded to that allegation by submitting the affidavit of the contracting officer stating
that the other bidders did attend the site visit. Howe did not respond to the Feinberg
affidavit.

        The Comptroller General has previously held that the failure to attend a
mandatory site visit is not a matter of bid responsiveness. In Edw. Kocharian &
Company, Inc., B-193045, 58 Comp. Gen. 214, 79-1 CPD ¶ 20, Jan. 15, 1979, the
Comptroller General set forth the rule regarding mandatory site visits and responsiveness.
Kocharian argued that failure on the part of the bidder to attend the mandatory site
inspection should cause the bid to be rejected as nonresponsive. The Comptroller
General stated that the test to be applied in determining the responsiveness of a bid is
whether the bid as submitted is an offer to perform the exact thing set forth in the IFB. If
the bidder promises to perform the work as set forth in the IFB, then the bid should not be
rejected as being nonresponsive because the bidder did not attend the site visit. In the
instant matter, the unrebutted evidence from the District shows that the awardee did
attend the site visit. However, even if the awardee had not attended the site visit, the
failure to attend the site visit does not render its bid nonresponsive. Accordingly, we
deny the protest.

DATED: April 5, 2008                                 /s/ Warren J. Nash
                                                     WARREN J. NASH
                                                     Administrative Judge

CONCURRING:

/s/ Jonathan D. Zischkau
JONATHAN D. ZISCHKAU
Chief Administrative Judge
