               DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD


PROTEST OF:

JENKINS SECURITY CONSULTANTS, INC.                     )
                                                       )       CAB No. P-0846
Solicitation No: DCHC-2009-R-5026                      )

        For the Protester, Jenkins Security Consultants, Inc.: Philip L. Kellogg, Esq. For the
District of Columbia Government: Talia S. Cohen, Esq., Assistant Attorney General, Office of
the Attorney General.

      Opinion by Chief Administrative Judge Jonathan D. Zischkau, with Administrative Judge
Warren J. Nash, concurring.

                                            OPINION
                                          Filing ID 32460553


        Jenkins Security Consultants, Inc., challenges the District’s cancellation of a request for
proposals (“RFP”) for animal control services. Jenkins’ proposal received the highest score from
the technical evaluation panel. Prior to the required submission of the proposed contract to the
City Council for approval, the Chief Procurement Officer (“CPO”) signed a determination
cancelling the solicitation in order to reassess the acquisition strategy, review the best practices
around the country, and issue a new solicitation to insure that the District obtains quality services
at the best price. Jenkins contends that the cancellation is arbitrary, capricious, and unlawful.
We conclude that the decision to cancel the RFP has a reasonable basis, and that the District did
not violate law, regulation, or the terms of the solicitation. Accordingly, we deny the protest.

                                        BACKGROUND

        On April 30, 2009, the Office of Contracting and Procurement (“OCP”) issued a
solicitation for a contractor to provide a combination of comprehensive animal care, animal
control services, and management of the District’s animal care and control facility. (Agency
Report (“AR”) Ex. 2). By August 5, 2009, the District received proposals from two offerors,
Jenkins and the Washington Humane Society. (AR Ex. 3).

       After reviewing the two proposals, and determining that each of the offerors was in the
competitive range, the contracting officer conducted discussions with both offerors. After the
discussions, the technical evaluation panel evaluated and ranked each offeror and determined
that Jenkins had the highest overall technical score. The contracting officer reviewed the
technical evaluation panel’s recommendation and, after conducting an independent evaluation,
recommended award to Jenkins as the offeror with the highest rated technical proposal and
lowest priced proposal. (AR Ex. 3).

       The contracting officer then initiated the process for obtaining an internal review required
before sending the proposed contract to the City Council, but the CPO decided that the RFP
should be canceled and thus OCP did not submit to the Council the proposed award. (AR Ex. 3).
                                                 -2-           Jenkins Security Consultants, Inc.
                                                                                   CAB No. P-0846


On March 1, 2010, the CPO signed a determination cancelling the solicitation, stating in relevant
part:

       After careful review, the Chief Procurement Officer (CPO) decided to cancel the
       solicitation in order to reassess the acquisition strategy and determine the most
       appropriate method to procure the required animal and control services. The CPO
       concluded that after a review of the best practices around the country, the District
       will prepare and issue a new solicitation to ensure the District obtains quality
       services at the best price for [the] residents of the District.

(AR Ex. 1). On March 29, 2010, Jenkins filed with the Board the instant protest of the
cancellation of the RFP. The District filed its agency report on April 15, and the parties have
filed various responsive pleadings.

        On May 11, 2010, the contracting officer, James H. Marshall, filed a declaration stating,
in pertinent part:

      Prior to issuing RFP No. DCHC-2009-R-5026, on March 3, 2009, the Department
      of Health provided the Office of Contracting and Procurement with the results of
      market research conducted on the delivery of animal care and control services in
      the Washington metropolitan region. (Attachment 1) The market research was
      used exclusively for the purpose of projecting a fair and reasonable price for the
      delivery of the required services; the information was not considered for the
      purpose of identifying possible alternative acquisition strategies. The acquisition
      strategy to be used in the procurement was never in question due to the fact that the
      approach to be used in the procurement was consistent with the manner in which
      the services had been previously procured by the District.

On May 28, 2010, Marshall filed a supplemental declaration including a comprehensive outline
of a national animal control and care research project to be conducted by OCP and the
Department of Health to identify best practices to be utilized by the District, with a July 10, 2010
timeline for recommending an acquisition strategy.

                                          DISCUSSION

        Our standard of review of a cancellation determination is well settled. A request for
proposals may be cancelled if the CPO determines that the action is taken in the best interest of
the District government and there is a reasonable basis for cancellation. D.C. Code § 2-303.07;
JHARBO Limited, Inc., CAB No. P-0527, Jan. 16, 1998, 45 D.C. Reg. 8701, 8703; Singleton
Electric Co., CAB No. P-0411, Nov. 15, 1994, 42 D.C. Reg. 4888, 4893.

        Jenkins argues that the cancellation is legally insufficient because the District does not
provide facts upon which it may be concluded that there was a reasonable basis for the
cancellation, stating that “[t]he C[P]O’s declaration contains no reference to facts of any kind
that gave rise to the need to ‘reassess the acquisition strategy.’ ” (Response to Agency Report, at
3). We do not agree. The CPO’s cancellation determination and the contracting officer’s two
                                                  -3-           Jenkins Security Consultants, Inc.
                                                                                   CAB No. P-0846


declarations clearly indicate a reasonable basis for cancellation, namely, the contracting agency’s
need to consider alternative acquisition strategies based upon a national survey. This type of
determination is committed generally to the business judgment of the contracting official and we
see no ground for concluding that the cancellation was arbitrary or irrational. Thus, we cannot
agree with Jenkins that the cancellation rationale is unsupported.

                                          CONCLUSION

           Because the District’s cancellation of the RFP has a reasonable basis, we deny Jenkins’
protest.

           SO ORDERED.

DATED: August 3, 2010                                   /s/ Jonathan D. Zischkau
                                                        JONATHAN D. ZISCHKAU
                                                        Chief Administrative Judge


CONCURRING:


/s/ Warren J. Nash
WARREN J. NASH
Administrative Judge
