               DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD
                                           Redacted
PROTEST OF:


TOMPKINS BUILDERS, INC.                      )
                                             )        CAB No. P-0801
Under RFP No. DCAM-2008-R-0088               )

       For the Protester: Douglas L. Patin, Esq., Robert J. Symon, Esq., Bradley Arant Boult
Cummings LLP. For the District of Columbia Government: Robert Schildkraut, Esq., Assistant
Attorney General. For the Intervener: Claude M. Bailey, Esq., Terry L. Elling, Esq., Venable
LLP.

      Opinion by Chief Administrative Judge Jonathan D. Zischkau, with Administrative Judge
Warren J. Nash, concurring.

                                           OPINION
                                         Filing ID 25312712

        Tompkins Builders, Inc., has protested the contracting officer’s decision to eliminate it
from a competition for construction of the Consolidated Forensics Laboratory (“CFL”) on the
ground that Tompkins did not meet two special standards of responsibility. Tompkins relied on
projects performed by its parent company, Turner Construction Company, and Turner’s
involvement in the CFL to satisfy the special standards of responsibility. Having reviewed the
record, we find that the contracting officer’s determination to exclude Tompkins from the
competition because it did not satisfy the special standards of responsibility was unreasonable
and irrational. Tompkins’ proposal and BAFO clearly demonstrate the commitment of the
personnel, management, and financial resources of its parent, Turner Construction, such that
Turner will have meaningful involvement in contract performance. Accordingly, we sustain the
protest and direct the contracting officer to perform a new and proper evaluation of Tompkins,
including conducting discussions and requesting additional BAFOs if necessary, and make a
proper selection decision.

                                       BACKGROUND

        On September 25, 2008, the District of Columbia, through the Office of Contracting and
Procurement (“OCP”), issued RFP DCAM-2008-R-0088 for the construction of the new
Consolidated Forensics Laboratory (“CFL”). (Agency Report (“AR”), Ex. 1). The new building
will enable the District to co-locate the District’s Metropolitan Police Department Forensic
Laboratory, the Department of Public Health, and the Chief Medical Examiner for improved and
efficient coordination of the functions of crime scene investigation, protection, and management
of public health issues, and forensic law enforcement.

        Included in the RFP were special standards of responsibility. (AR Exs. 1, 1a). These
special standards of responsibility were included in two separate sections of the RFP, section B.2
                                                 -2-                          Tompkins Builders, Inc.
                                                                                   CAB No. P-0801

and section L.5.1.1. (AR Exs. 1, 1a). Amendment No.2 of the RFP amended the language used
in section B.2 and section L.5.1.1. (AR Ex. 2).

       Amendment No.2 deleted the language from section B.2 in the RFP in its entirety and
replaced it with the following language:

       B.2 Special Standard of Responsibility: In order to be eligible for award, the
       offeror, as General Contractor, must have completed in the past five years a
       LEED certified construction project value of at least $75,000,000; and must have
       completed or is currently in the process of completing (at least 50% percent
       completion at the time of submitting proposals) a scientific research laboratory
       with the a construction value of at least $75,000,000 (See paragraph L.5.1.1).

       Failure to meet any of the above requirements shall constitute a technically
       unacceptable offer. (emphasis in the original).

The language in Amendment No.2 also deleted the language from section L.5.1.1 in the RFP in
its entirety and replaced it with the following language:

       L.5.1.1 Special Standards of Responsibility - In order to be eligible for award, the
       offeror, as General Contractor, must have completed in past five years a LEED
       certified construction project with a construction value of at least $75,000,000;
       and must have completed or is currently in the process of completing (at least
       50%completion at the time of submitting proposals) a scientific research
       laboratory with a construction value of at least $75,000,000. Offeror shall
       describe in detail all current projects detailing the above. In addition, the District
       will not find responsible any offeror that does not provide with its proposal
       information adequate to determine its compliance with the Stated Special
       Standards of Responsibility. At a minimum, an offeror should provide the
       following:

              a) Time Period of the Construction;
              b) Name and location of scientific research laboratory;
              c) Name of contact person;
              d) Phone number of contact person;
              e) Total contract amount;
              f) Year completed

       Failure to meet any of the above requirements shall constitute a technically
       unacceptable offer. (emphasis in the original).

       On December 15, 2008, two offerors, Tompkins and Whiting Turner Contracting
Company, Inc., timely submitted sealed proposals. In its proposal, to meet the special standards
of responsibility, Tompkins submitted several project references in which its parent, Turner
Construction, served as the general contractor. (AR Ex. 5). There is no dispute that the project
references meet the special standards of responsibility if Tompkins can rely on them. Tompkins
                                                 -3-                          Tompkins Builders, Inc.
                                                                                   CAB No. P-0801

is a wholly-owned subsidiary of Turner. (AR Ex. 5). Tompkins’ president is a Turner vice-
president. Additionally, the Tompkins proposal states that:

       In 2003, Tompkins Builders became a wholly owned subsidiary of Turner
       Construction Company. This acquisition has allowed Tompkins to continue its
       ability to perform quality construction as well as integrate itself into the many
       attributes of Turner. Benefits to Tompkins include access to the best managers
       and builders, as well as experience with specialty market segments such as
       Laboratories, Pharmaceutical and Life Sciences buildings. As a Turner business
       unit, Tompkins has all of the resources of the nation’s largest General Contractor
       and is able to offer all services brought to fruition by Turner. These advantages
       include the following: Marketplace Influence, Buying Power, 5000+ Employees,
       Bonding Capacity, Turner Logistics, LEED® Leadership, Comprehensive
       Insurance, Financial Strength.

Under the Project Approach Introduction, the proposal provides: “Additionally, Tompkins’ team
will be supported by the technical capabilities of our corporate office and trade subcontractors,
which will add significant value to the project in terms of cost efficiency, logistical resources and
qualified manpower, realization of schedule performance, cost containment and quality.”
Included in the proposal was a Tompkins CFL project organizational chart which listed Ed
Small, the Tompkins president and Turner vice president, Turner employees as Project Director
and Project Superintendent, and the Turner Laboratory Bio-Medical Group for “Corporate
Oversight.” The Project Manager, Mr. Jim Gaughan, was listed as a Turner manager who would
serve “as the on-site Project Director for Tompkins for the Consolidated Forensics Laboratory
(CFL) Project . . . and daily on-site contact for all issues with the CFL Project Team . . . [and]
will utilize his past experience in national laboratory, and other public health and safety projects
to manage and coordinate the overall construction program.” The Project Superintendent, Mr.
Greg Dudek, is listed as being “responsible for the overall success of the laboratory operations,
scheduling and coordination of all subcontractor field activities, expediting materials and
equipment, monitoring the project schedule and budget, implementing safety, and interfacing
with the project owner and architect on a day-to-day basis.” (Tompkins Supplemental Authority
in Support of Amended Complaint, at 3, Exs. C-E).

       The contracting officer appointed four technical evaluators. The technical evaluation
panel was given the technical proposals, and conducted an evaluation of the proposals. One
panel member, Allain Al-Alami, in an apparent reference to the projects listed by Tompkins for
the special standards of responsibility, included the following evaluation comments: “Not clear
if they ‘Tompkins’ performed or their parent company ‘Turner’.                However Turner’s
depth/resources are behind them.”

        By letter dated January 16, 2009, the original contracting officer for the procurement
advised Tompkins that it was within the competitive range and requested that Tompkins submit a
written best and final offer (“BAFO”) including any revisions to the original technical and price
proposals. Apparently, no oral discussions were conducted with the two offerors. In the January
16 letter, the contracting officer also required that Tompkins provide a detailed response to each
                                               -4-                          Tompkins Builders, Inc.
                                                                                 CAB No. P-0801

of the questions listed in an attached “BAFO - Questions to Offeror” document. (Tompkins
Comments on Agency Report, Ex. A). BAFO Question 1 states:

       The feedback from the District’s conducted reference check yielded the fact that
       all of the projects listed to satisfy the Special Standard of Responsibility Clause
       and experience, and most of the projects listed for similarity were actually
       performed by Turner and not Tompkins:

       a. Has “Tompkins Builders” completed or is in the process of completing a
       scientific research laboratory facility by itself as GC with a minimum value of
       $75M as required under the solicitation, and with the contract its own name
       (Tompkins Builders)? If yes, provide details.

       b. Explain the exact role the “Turner Construction” will play in the CFL project if
       your firm is the successful awardee, and what will be its exact contractual
       relationship with Tompkins Builders as an awardee under this contract.

In a BAFO response under cover letter dated January 29, 2009, Tompkins submitted responses to
the BAFO questions. Tompkins’ response to BAFO Question 1 states as follows:

       1.) Response: Tompkins Builders is a wholly-owned subsidiary of Turner
       Construction Company and operates as 1 of 44 business units operating under the
       Turner flag and is therefore entitled to include in its portfolio all relevant
       corporate experience, services and resources. As presented in the technical
       response, Tompkins Builders was attempting to demonstrate to the DC
       Government our depth and breadth of experience by exceeding the requirements
       of Standard Responsibility and Similarity.

       Turner treats Tompkins as one of its subsidiaries and business units much like our
       competitors . . . .

       We share resources such as people, bonding, insurance, and financial
       management.

       1A.) Response: Yes, The Harvey Wiley Federal Building was completed by
       Tompkins Builders on October 2001. This project met the similar requirements to
       the CFL project based on its complexity, size value and building purpose. The
       building is a new research facility which houses the FDA Center for Food Safety
       and Applied Nutrition. The 410,000 SF, five story research laboratory building
       provides new life sciences and chemistry laboratories along with offices for
       scientists and their staff. The building features two mass spectrometer labs, an
       insectaria, two general labs, a microbiology lab, two Class 1,000 and 100 clean
       rooms, bio-level three (BL3) suites, a herbarium, six environmental rooms, and
       tissue culture rooms. Since the site work and foundation package work was
       performed by a separate contractor, the Tompkins contract value of $73 million
       actually represents a project value greater than $75 million. In addition, this FDA
                                               -5-                         Tompkins Builders, Inc.
                                                                                CAB No. P-0801

       Laboratory project is 100,000 square feet larger than the CFL and, years of cost
       escalation represents a project valued well in excess of $100 million in today’s
       construction dollars.

       1B.) Response: If selected to construct the CFL, Tompkins Builders will have the
       contractual responsibility and accountability to the District of Columbia
       Government. As our parent company, Turner Construction Company will provide
       the pool of resources from which Tompkins will have to perform the requirements
       of the contract. This pool, as described above, includes financial, bonding,
       expertise and personnel to name a few. As 1 of Turner’s 44 business units,
       Tompkins operates with the full faith and credit of Turner Construction Company.

       Tompkins further responded to BAFO Question 1 by attaching to its submittal a Turner
corporate officer chain of command showing the relationship between various business segments
and Turner, with Mr. Ed Small as Tompkins president and Turner vice president reporting to
Turner’s executive vice president. Another attachment was a Tompkins/Turner DC area
combined revenue summary recently published in the Washington Business Journal. (AR Ex. 6).

       Tompkins BAFO included a commitment letter and resume/CFL project responsibilities
document for the Senior Project Manager, Mr. John Rinaldo, a Turner manager, providing
additional detail respecting the Tompkins/Turner relationship:

               John comes to Tompkins as an intra-company resource bringing over 27
       years of experience in laboratory and pharmaceutical projects with Turner
       Construction Company. John has been selected to serve as the on-site Sr. Project
       Manager for Tompkins for the Consolidated Forensics Laboratory (CFL) Project
       due to his extensive knowledge and experience in constructing laboratories.
               He will be the daily on-site contact for all issues with the CFL Project
       Team. John will utilize his past experience in national laboratory, and other
       public health and safety projects to manage and coordinate the overall
       construction program.

(AR Ex. 6). In response to BAFO question 3, Tompkins states that Mr. Rinaldo “will be the
primary point of contact on day to day activities and interface with the Owner, Jacobs, and HOK.
In the BAFO, Tompkins “fully commits John Rinaldo to fulfill the role of Senior Project
Manager” on the CFL contract and Tompkins “guarantee[s] his availability and 100%
commitment to the [CFL] project from Notice-to-Proceed until construction completion.” This
commitment letter is signed by Mr. Ed Small, president of Tompkins, and as stated above, a
general manager and vice president of Turner. According to Exhibit C in Tompkins’ response to
the Agency Report, Mr. Small serves as a vice president of Turner Construction and as “General
Manager of a Turner unit, [has] the authority … to enter into business agreements and contracts
up to the prescribed limits.” Mr. Small signed the BAFO and its proposal on behalf of
Tompkins. In another Tompkins CFL project organizational chart furnished in the BAFO
response, Turner’s John Rinaldo reports to the Tompkins vice president and construction
executive, Mr. Kamrad. Also on a reporting line to Mr. Kamrad is the “Turner Laboratory Bio-
Medical Group” for corporate oversight of the CFL project. Listed as Project Superintendent on
                                                -6-                          Tompkins Builders, Inc.
                                                                                  CAB No. P-0801

the same chart is Mr. Greg Dukek, another Turner employee. In the “Corporate Overview”
section of the BAFO response, Tompkins states that it was acquired by Turner Construction in
2003, is a wholly-owned subsidiary of Turner and that “Turner has three wholly-owned facilities
around the country” one of which is Tompkins. The response further states that “Tompkins
operates with the full support of Turner Construction in all aspects of our business” including
access to over 5000 employees nationwide, and that if Tompkins needs special expertise and
personnel, such expertise or personnel “are immediately made available to Tompkins from
Turner as a normal course of business.” Regarding bonding capacity, “Turner Construction
Company maintains bonding capacity in excess of $6 billion and provides bonding for all of its
Business Units which includes Tompkins.” Regarding financial capacity, the BAFO response
states that “Tompkins operates with the full faith and credit of Turner Construction.”

       The chair of the evaluation panel made the following comment in an evaluation on
February 5, 2009:

       In addition, the final information provided by Tompkins in their BAFO
       submission failed to provide any new or additional information that would allow
       the evaluation panel to revise their scoring of Tompkins Builders, especially on its
       past performance and required experience in meeting the Special Standard of
       Responsibility clause. The additional project information presented by Tompkins
       in their BAFO submission falls short in meeting the minimum dollar amount of
       75K [sic] for LEED and Lab projects completed and the period of performance
       range, of [the] past 5 years, required in the Special Standard of Responsibility
       clause.

(District’s May 21, 2009 Response, at 2).

        By letter dated February 17, 2009, the contracting officer notified Tompkins that its
proposal would not be recommended for award. (AR Ex. 3). By email dated February 18, 2009,
Tompkins requested a debriefing. (AR Ex. 3). The contracting officer refused to provide a
debriefing stating that the request for a debriefing was premature because an award had yet to be
made. (AR Ex. 3). Tompkins filed a protest (CAB No. P-0797) on February 27, 2009,
requesting the Board to direct the contracting officer to provide Tompkins with a debriefing. A
telephone status conference regarding the protest was conducted by the Board on March 4, 2009.
At the conclusion of the status conference, the Board issued an order directing the contracting
officer to provide the debriefing requested by Tompkins. (CAB No. P-0797 Order dated March
4, 2009). The debriefing was held on March 11, 2009, and conducted by a second contracting
officer. (Protest, dated March 20, 2009; AR Ex. 3). During the debriefing, the new contracting
officer became aware of irregularities in the technical evaluation of Tompkins. (AR Ex. 4). The
contracting officer stated that OCP was advised by legal counsel that Turner’s experience could
not be considered for their evaluation of Tompkins’ proposal and that Tompkins’ failure to
possess the requisite experience played a significant role in the results of the technical
evaluation. Tompkins then questioned why Tompkins’ proposal had not been considered
technically unacceptable and eliminated from award consideration. The contracting officer
admitted that OCP did not properly follow RFP Section L.5.1.1. (CAB No. P-0801 Protest dated
March 20, 2009). Due to these irregularities, the contracting officer and District counsel
                                                 -7-                           Tompkins Builders, Inc.
                                                                                    CAB No. P-0801

terminated the debriefing and instructed Tompkins that the contracting officer would review the
technical evaluation to determine whether it was conducted in compliance with the requirements
stated in the RFP. (AR Ex 4).

         On March 20, 2009, Tompkins filed a protest docketed as CAB No. P-0801. The issues
raised by this protest were: (1) whether the contracting officer conducted an analysis of the offer
“most advantageous” to the District, (2) whether the District properly evaluated Tompkins’
technical proposal; and (3) whether the District conducted a proper cost-technical trade-off
analysis. On March 31, 2009, the District filed a motion to dismiss Tompkins’ protest arguing
that all three of Tompkins’ allegations were premature since the contracting officer was currently
reviewing the technical evaluation and would not provide an award recommendation until that
review was completed. (AR Ex. 3). Tompkins submitted its opposition to the District’s motion
on April 3, 2009. (AR Ex. 3).

        On March 31, 2009, a new (third) contracting officer was appointed for this procurement.
(AR Ex. 3). Based upon the irregularities in the technical evaluation that were discovered during
the debriefing, the contracting officer determined that it would be proper to re-evaluate each
proposal in accordance with the evaluation criteria in the RFP. (AR Ex. 4). While conducting
this re-evaluation of Tompkins’ proposal and BAFO, the contracting officer determined that
Tompkins did not meet the special standards of responsibility stated in the RFP. (AR Ex. 4). In
a determination dated April 17, 2009, the contracting officer determined that Tompkins did not
meet the special standards of responsibility because Tompkins could not rely on Turner’s
projects to meet the special standards, and thus Tompkins was eliminated from further
consideration for award. (AR Ex. 4). Upon receiving notification of its elimination from the
procurement, Tompkins filed an amended protest on April 22, 2009. Between April 28 and May
21, 2009, the parties (including the intervener) filed briefs and exhibits to supplement the record.

                                          DISCUSSION

       We exercise jurisdiction over this protest pursuant to D.C. Code § 2-309.03(a)(1).

        The parties agree that the primary issue for us to decide is whether the contracting officer
properly determined to exclude Tompkins from the competition on the basis that Tompkins
could not rely on the performance experience of its parent company, Turner Construction, in
satisfying the solicitation’s special standards of responsibility. Definitive or special standards of
responsibility are specific and objective standards established by an agency as a precondition to
award that are designed to measure a prospective contractor's ability to perform the contract.”
M.C. Dean, Inc., CAB No. P-0505, Dec. 3, 1997, 45 D.C. Reg. 8664, 8669. The criteria limit the
class of contractors to those meeting the specified qualitative and quantitative qualifications
necessary for adequate contract performance. Id. Unless the contracting officer’s determination
was unreasonable, the determination should not be disturbed. M.C. Dean, 45 D.C. Reg. at 8672
(sustaining protest where contracting officer could not reasonably have found that the proposed
awardee complied with the special standards of responsibility); Universal Bldg. Maint., Inc., B-
282456, July 15, 1999, 99-2 CPD ¶ 32. We conclude that the contracting officer’s determination
– that Tompkins could not rely on its parent company’s past performance in assessing
compliance with the special standards of responsibly – was unreasonable and irrational.
                                                -8-                          Tompkins Builders, Inc.
                                                                                  CAB No. P-0801



        Here, the contracting officer concluded that Tompkins could not rely on Turner’s
performance in meeting the special standards of responsibility and thereby eliminated Tompkins
from the competition, leaving only one offeror in the competition, Whiting Turner Contracting
Company. We begin by noting that the contracting officer misapprehended the law in his
determination by implying in his April 17 determination that Turner had to furnish a written
commitment of resources in Tompkins’ proposal. The contracting officer states in his
determination: “Tompkins did not provide any documentation in its proposal from Turner that
states it will fully back Tompkins' efforts to obtain the contract. Nor did Tompkins provide
documentation from Turner that states the financial resources of Turner, including lines of credit,
operating capital, and performance bonding, would be used to complete the contract.”

         GAO precedent, followed by the United States Court of Federal Claims, sets out the
standard guiding our resolution of the issue before us. The GAO has repeatedly held that an
agency properly may attribute the experience or past performance of a parent or affiliated
company to an offeror where the firm's proposal demonstrates that the resources of the parent or
affiliated company will affect the performance of the offeror. Perini/Jones, Joint Venture, B-
285906, Nov. 1, 2000, 2002 CPD ¶ 68; Hot Shot Express, Inc., B-290482, Aug. 2, 2002, 2002
CPD ¶ 139; Universal Bldg. Maint., Inc., B-282456, July 15, 1999, 99-2 CPD ¶ 32. The relevant
consideration is whether the resources of the parent or affiliated company – its workforce,
management, facilities, or other resources – will be provided or relied upon, such that the parent
or affiliate will have meaningful involvement in contract performance. Perini/Jones, Joint
Venture, B-285906, Nov. 1, 2000, 2002 CPD ¶ 68; NAHB Research Ctr., Inc., B-278876.2, May
4, 1998, 98-1 CPD ¶ 150. Where no provision in the solicitation precludes offerors from relying
on the resources of their corporate parent or affiliated companies in performing the contract, and
an offeror represents in its proposal that resources of a related company will be committed to the
contract, the agency properly may consider those resources in evaluating the proposal. See
Physician Corp. of America, B-270698 et al., Apr. 10, 1996, 96-1 CPD ¶ 198; T&S Products,
Inc. v. United States, 48 Fed. Cl. 100, 111 (2000). Absent a direction from the contracting
officer requesting an offeror to provide a written commitment from the parent or affiliated firm,
the offeror itself may commit the resources of its parent or affiliate.

        In Ecompex, Inc., B-292865.4, June 18, 2004, 2004 CPD ¶ 149, cited by the District, the
offeror’s (AEC) proposal included a letter from Ahtna, Inc., it parent company, stating that it
fully backed AEC's efforts to obtain the contract, and also specifically stated that the financial
resources of Ahtna including lines of credit, operating capital, and performance bonding, would
be used to complete the contract. The GAO held that in view of Ahtna's commitment of
financial resources, the agency had a reasonable basis for attributing the experience of Ahtna to
AEC in evaluating AEC's experience. Here, there is no question that there was a similar
commitment of Turner’s financial resources to the CFL contract. The only difference here is that
the commitment was stated by Tompkins in its proposal on behalf of Turner.

        Tompkins’ BAFO and proposal show the commitment of key Turner personnel,
management, and financial resources to the CFL project. Three key personnel Turner are
identified in the proposal and BAFO with the commitment of any additional Turner personnel
that Tompkins would need. John Rinaldo, Tompkins’ “Senior Project Manager” for the CFL, is
                                                -9-                          Tompkins Builders, Inc.
                                                                                  CAB No. P-0801

a Turner employee, was selected to serve as the on-site senior project manager for the CFL
project and the BAFO states that he will be “the daily on-site contact for all issues with the CFL
Project Team” and that he will “utilize his past experience in national laboratory and other public
health and safety projects to manage and coordinate the overall construction program.” (AR Ex.
6). In response to BAFO question 3, Tompkins states that Mr. Rinaldo “will be the primary
point of contact on day to day activities and interface with the Owner, Jacobs, and HOK.) In the
BAFO, Tompkins “fully commits John Rinaldo to fulfill the role of Senior Project Manager” on
the CFL contract and Tompkins “guarantee[s] his availability and 100% commitment to the
[CFL] project from Notice-to-Proceed until construction completion.” This commitment letter is
signed by Mr. Ed Small, who is the president of Tompkins. Mr. Small, according to the
Turner/Tompkins organization chart referenced in response to BAFO question 1, and included as
an attachment to the BAFO response, is one of 7 managers/vice presidents reporting to Turner’s
executive vice president. According to Exhibit C in Tompkins’ response to the Agency Report,
Mr. Small serves as a vice president of Turner Construction and as “General Manager of a
Turner unit, [has] the authority … to enter into business agreements and contracts up to the
prescribed limits.” Mr. Small signed the BAFO and its proposal on behalf of Tompkins. In
another Tompkins CFL project organizational chart furnished in the BAFO response, Turner’s
John Rinaldo reports to the Tompkins vice president and construction executive, Mr. Kamrad.
Also on a reporting line to Mr. Kamrad is the “Turner Laboratory Bio-Medical Group” which
will provide corporate oversight for the CFL project. Listed as Project Superintendent on the
same chart is Mr. Greg Dukek, another Turner employee. In Tompkins’ proposal, Mr. Dudek is
listed as being “responsible for the overall success of the laboratory operations, scheduling and
coordination of all subcontractor field activities, expediting materials and equipment, monitoring
the project schedule and budget, implementing safety, and interfacing with the project owner and
architect on a day-to-day basis.”

        In the “Corporate Overview” section of the BAFO response, Tompkins states that it was
acquired by Turner Construction in 2003, is a wholly-owned subsidiary of Turner and that
“Turner has three wholly-owned facilities around the country” one of which is Tompkins. The
response further states that “Tompkins operates with the full support of Turner Construction in
all aspects of our business” including access to over 5000 employees nationwide, and that if
Tompkins needs special expertise and personnel, such expertise or personnel “are immediately
made available to Tompkins from Turner as a normal course of business.” Regarding bonding
capacity, “Turner Construction Company maintains bonding capacity in excess of $6 billion and
provides bonding for all of its Business Units which includes Tompkins.” Regarding financial
capacity, the BAFO response states that “Tompkins operates with the full faith and credit of
Turner Construction.”

       These pledges of Turner personnel, management, and financial resources clearly
demonstrate that the resources of Turner will affect Tompkins’ performance of the CFL project,
such that Turner will have meaningful involvement in contract performance. Accordingly, the
contracting officer’s determination to exclude Tompkins from the competition was unreasonable
and irrational. To the extent that the evaluators in prior technical evaluations downgraded
Tompkins under the mistaken belief that Turner’s experience could not be considered for their
evaluation of Tompkins’ proposal and that Tompkins’ failure to possess the requisite experience
                                                - 10 -                       Tompkins Builders, Inc.
                                                                                  CAB No. P-0801

played a significant role in the results of the prior technical evaluations, those evaluations were
flawed. A new evaluation of Tompkins is required.

                                        CONCLUSION

        In sum, we have carefully considered the record presented in this protest and conclude
that the contracting officer unreasonably excluded Tompkins from the CFL competition based on
the special standards of responsibility. Accordingly, we sustain the protest and direct the
contracting officer to complete a proper new evaluation of Tompkins’ offer. If the contracting
officer deems it necessary to conduct discussions with the offerors, he shall do so and request
further BAFOs. After completing a new evaluation, the contracting officer shall make a proper,
documented selection decision based on the terms and conditions of the solicitation and the law.

       SO ORDERED.


DATED: May 21, 2009                                      /s/ Jonathan D. Zischkau
                                                         JONATHAN D. ZISCHKAU
                                                         Chief Administrative Judge


CONCURRING:


/s/ Warren J. Nash
WARREN J. NASH
Administrative Judge
