               DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD


PROTEST OF:

PROGRESSIVE EDUCATIONAL EXPERIENCES                          )
IN COOPERATIVE CULTURES                                      )
                                                             )       CAB No. P-0889
Solicitation No: DCCF-2011-R-3562 SDA 2                      )

       For the Protester: Sara Stone, pro se. For the District of Columbia Government: Janice
N. Skipper, Esq., Assistant Attorney General, Office of the Attorney General.

      Opinion by Administrative Judge Monica C. Parchment, with Chief Administrative Judge
Marc D. Loud and Administrative Judge Maxine E. McBean, concurring.

                                            OPINION
                                       Filing ID 40712511

        The protester, Progressive Educational Experiences in Cooperative Cultures (“PEECC”),
challenges the evaluation and resulting awards made by the District of Columbia under Request
for Proposal No. DCCF-2011-R-3562 SDA 2 (“Solicitation”) for year-round youth workforce
development programs in the District. The protester alleges that the District’s award decision
was improperly based upon a number of ethical and procedural irregularities during the
evaluation which form the basis of its protest allegations. The District has moved to dismiss this
protest as untimely and has also asserted that the protester lacks legal standing to pursue this
protest before the Board.

       The Board also finds that the present allegations were untimely filed and, for this reason,
dismisses this protest.

                                        BACKGROUND

        The Solicitation was first issued by the District’s Office of Contracting and Procurement,
on April 8, 2011, on behalf of the Department of Employment Services (“DOES”) and sought a
contractor to provide quality year-round youth workforce development programs to meet the
needs of the District’s youth and the requirements of the District of Columbia Youth
Employment Services Initiative Amendment Act of 2005 and the Workforce Investment Act of
1998. (Agency Report (“AR”) Ex. 2.) In particular, the Solicitation specified that the successful
offeror would design and implement a year round youth program that would provide services to
eligible out-of-school youth, ages 16-21 years old, including alternative education opportunities,
career exploration and work readiness, placement, case management and follow-up services.
(Id.)

       The Solicitation further stated that the awardee would provide the required services for
two distinct Service Delivery Areas (“SDA”) to include SDA District 1 (Wards 1, 2, 3, 4) and
SDA District 2 (Wards 5, 6, 7, 8). (Id.) The District stated in the Solicitation its intent to award
                                                 -2-                        PEECC, CAB No. P-0889


at least one contract for each SDA. (Id.) Several amendments were issued by the District to the
original Solicitation after it was issued. (AR Ex. 3.)

       In total, the District received 22 proposals in response to the Solicitation including the
proposal of the protester, PEECC. (Id.) The District convened a technical panel which
conducted independent and consensus evaluations and scoring of these 22 proposals. (Id.) The
Contracting Officer also conducted a separate and independent evaluation of each proposal
received by the District. (Id.)

        Based upon the evaluation and scoring of these proposals, 13 of the 22 offerors were
determined to be within the competitive range based upon the fact that the District determined
that they met the minimum mandatory requirements of the Solicitation. (AR Exs. 3, 6.)
Accordingly, these competitive range offerors were directed to submit best and final offers to the
District. (AR Ex. 3.) The other remaining 9 offerors, including the protester, PEECC, were
excluded from the competitive range based upon their lower assigned technical scores. (Id.)
Additionally, these same 9 offerors were also issued letters from the Contracting Officer on July
28, 2011, stating that their proposals had been determined not to be in the competitive range and
that they were no longer being considered for award. (AR Exs. 3, 7.) The record in this protest
reflects that this notice of exclusion from the competitive range was, in fact, sent by email to
PEECC on July 28, 2011. (AR Ex. 7.)

        However, despite its receipt of notice of its exclusion from the competitive range on July
28, 2011, PEECC did not file this protest with the Board until August 23, 2011. The protester
generally alleges in this bid protest that: 1) the District compromised the integrity of the
procurement process during its conduct of this procurement; 2) the District issued excessive
modifications, communication lags, leadership changes, and irregular extensions beyond the
official Solicitation closing date thereby providing an unfair competitive advantage to certain
offerors; 3) the District inappropriately disclosed its preferred pricing ceiling and other pertinent
information thereby providing an unfair competitive advantage to certain offerors; 4) the District
improperly made awards to offerors with no significant past performance experience for the
services sought under the Solicitation; and 5) the District failed to receive and fully evaluate and
score the protester’s complete proposal.

        On September 23, 2011, the District filed a motion to dismiss the protest as untimely and
also asserted that the protester lacks standing. The protester opposed the motion and further
alleged that its ability to obtain information regarding the underlying evaluation to support its
protest allegations was impeded despite its numerous Freedom of Information Act (“FOIA”)
requests and other requests for information that it made to the District.

                                          DISCUSSION

      We exercise jurisdiction over this protest and its underlying allegations pursuant to D.C.
Code §2-360.03(a)(1).

        D.C. Code §2-360.08(b) mandates that protests be filed with the Board “not later than 10
business days after the basis of protest is known or should have been known, whichever is
earlier.” The Board has clarified this by stating that the 10 business days begin to calculate when
                                                -3-                        PEECC, CAB No. P-0889


the bidder or offeror knows or should have known both the basis of the protest and that the
District has taken an adverse action towards it. Sigal Construction Corporation, CAB No. P-
0690, Nov. 24, 2004, 52 D.C. Reg. 4243. The Board has also established that notice to a bidder
that it is not in the competitive range constitutes knowledge of adverse action by the District
against the bidder. Community Bridge, Inc., CAB No. P-0848, Jan. 13, 2011. This 10 day time
limit may not be extended by the Board, even in instances where the bidder is waiting for
information from a FOIA request. SAGA Adventures, Inc., CAB No. P-0704, June 17, 2005, 54
D.C. Reg. 1936.

        The protester has alleged that, between October 25, 2010, and June 8, 2011, it observed
pervasive irregularities in this procurement process which it believed to be inappropriate and
prejudicial to its company. Protester Response to Motion to Dismiss, p. 1. However, the
protester failed to file a single protest challenging any of these alleged, ongoing, irregularities
within 10 business days after they supposedly occurred between October 25, 2010, and June 8,
2011.

        Similarly, PEECC also did not timely protest its exclusion from the competitive range in
this procurement within 10 business days notwithstanding this adverse action by the District.
Specifically, the protester did not file the instant protest until August 23, 2011, which was 18
business days subsequent to the District notifying PEECC that its proposal would not be
considered for award as it was not within the competitive range.

       Consequently, we now find that PEECC’s present protest is untimely with respect to both
challenging its alleged observation of evaluation irregularities occurring between October 25,
2010, and June 8, 2011 and, more significantly, its exclusion from the competitive range upon
which PEECC certainly knew, or should have known, that it had a basis of protest and that it had
been subject to adverse action by the District. Further, having found these protest allegations to
be untimely filed, the Board finds it unnecessary to determine the issue of whether the protester
would otherwise have legal standing in this case under the relevant circumstances.

                                        CONCLUSION

       For the reasons discussed above, we hereby dismiss the present protest as untimely.

       SO ORDERED.


DATED: November 3, 2011                               /s/ Monica C. Parchment
                                                      MONICA C. PARCHMENT
                                                      Administrative Judge


CONCURRING:

/s/ Marc D. Loud, Sr.                                 /s/ Maxine E. McBean
MARC D. LOUD, SR.                                     MAXINE E. MCBEAN
Chief Administrative Judge                            Administrative Judge
