              DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD


PROTEST OF:

CNA, INC.                                           )
                                                    )       CAB No. P-0875
                                                    )
Solicitation No: DCKA-2010-B-0166                   )




      For the Protester, CNA, Inc., Mr. John Cheeks, pro se. For the District of Columbia
Government: Alton Woods, Esq., Assistant Attorney General, Office of the Attorney General.

      Opinion by Chief Administrative Judge Marc D. Loud, Sr., with Administrative Judge
Warren J. Nash, concurring.

                                            OPINION
                                       Filing ID 36454556

        Protester CNA, Inc. (“Protester”) alleges various grounds in its protest against the
District’s solicitation for the rehabilitation of Columbia Plaza, NE. CNA contends that the three
other bidders to the procurement were “affiliate companies” and that their bids lacked proper
“independent price determination(s)”. CNA also “questions” the “affirmative action preference
certification(s)” given by the District’s Department of Local, Small, Disadvantaged, Business
Enterprises (“DSLDBE”) to the other three bidders. The District filed a motion to dismiss,
asserting that CNA submitted an unacceptable bid guarantee, was properly found nonresponsive,
and that CNA’s protest lacks a clear and concise statement of its legal and factual grounds. The
Board agrees that the protester submitted an unacceptable bid guarantee and was properly found
nonresponsive. Accordingly, we dismiss the protest with prejudice.

                                       BACKGROUND

        The Office of Contracting and Procurement (“OCP”) advertised Invitation For Bids No.
DCKA-2010-B-0166 on December 1, 2010 (“IFB”). The IFB directed all bidders to provide,
inter alia, bid security with their bids as follows:

       Section 102, Article 12 Bonding Requirements, Bid Guaranty of the Standards and
       Specifications for Highways and Structures 2005:

       On all bids of $100,000 or more, security is required to insure the execution of the
       contract. No bid will be considered unless it is so guaranteed. Each bidder must furnish
       with his bid either a bid bond (Form 264640-5) with good and sufficient sureties, a
       certified check payable to the Treasurer of the District of Columbia (uncertified check
       will not be accepted), negotiable United States bond (at par value), or an irrevocable
       letter of credit in an amount not less than five percent (5) of the amount of his bid…
       (Motion To Dismiss, p. 3-4).
                                              -2-                                   CNA Corporation
                                                                                    CAB No. P-0875




      The bids were due and opened on January 12, 2011, with four bidders responding to the
IFB. Three bids were deemed responsive, and the protester’s bid was deemed non responsive.
The contracting officer determined that the protester failed to submit a valid bid security.
(Motion To Dismiss Ex. 10, p.2, para. 9.) As bid security, the protester submitted a one-page
handwritten note dated January 10, 2011, with its bid stating as follows:

       CNA, INC THRU INVESTOR SHALL FURNISH A COPY OF REAL PROPERTY
       DEED IN LUI (sic) OF A BID BOND CERTIFICATE TO THE DEPT. OF PUBLIC
       WORKS OFFICE OF CONTRACTING AND PROCUREMENT FOR INVITATION
       DCKA-2010-B-0166…” (Motion to Dismiss, Ex. 13, p.2).

       Additionally, the protester filed a motion with the Board on January 31, 2011, (after the
bid opening) to submit a bid bond under seal. The District filed an opposition thereto on
February 2, 2011, arguing that the protester’s failure to raise the bid bond non responsiveness
determination upon filing the initial protest rendered it untimely.

                                          DISCUSSION

       We exercise jurisdiction pursuant to D.C. Code § 2-309.03(a)(1).

         In its protest, CNA does not does address the issue of its failure to submit a bid
guarantee, nor challenge the District’s non-responsiveness determination. To date, CNA has not
disputed the District’s contention that CNA sought to submit the handwritten “real property deed
in lui (sic) of a bid bond certificate” as noted in the District’s motion to Dismiss.

        Rather, CNA’s very succinct protest (2 pages) conclusively states that the top three
bidders were “affiliate companies” and suggests something inappropriate occurred with their
affirmative action preference certifications. There is nothing further in the record regarding
either allegation (affiliate companies nor questionable certifications).

          The Board has consistently recognized that a bid bond is a material requirement because
it is a type of security that assures that a bidder will not withdraw its bid within the time
specified for acceptance, and if required, will execute a written contract and furnish payment and
performance bonds. CNA Corporation, CAB No. P-0826, Feb. 5, 2010 (citations omitted). When
a bidder supplies a defective bond, the bid itself is rendered defective and must be considered
nonresponsive. Nation Capital Builders, LLC, CAB No. P-0761, Nov. 20, 2007, 57 D.C. Reg.
741. A nonresponsive bidder is not in line for award and therefore lacks standing to raise other
challenges regarding an award. C.P.F. Corp., CAB No. P-0521, Jan. 12, 1998, 45 D.C. Reg.
8697, 8699 (the Board will not consider protests by bidders who are not next in line for award if
the protest is sustained).

        In this case, the protester’s “property deed” is not an acceptable form of bid guarantee.
As noted herein, the bid solicitation identified the acceptable forms of bid guarantee, including
the following:
                                             -3-                                   CNA Corporation
                                                                                   CAB No. P-0875




       On all bids of $100,000 or more, security is required to insure the execution of the
       contract. No bid will be considered unless it is so guaranteed. Each bidder must furnish
       with his bid either a bid bond (Form 264640-5) with good and sufficient sureties, a
       certified check payable to the Treasurer of the District of Columbia (uncertified check
       will not be accepted), negotiable United States bond (at par value), or an irrevocable
       letter of credit in an amount not less than five percent (5) of the amount of his bid
       (Motion to Dismiss, Ex. 1, Section 102, Article 12 Bonding Requirements, Bid Guaranty
       of the Standards and Specifications for Highways and Structures 2005)

       CNA’s bid herein exceeded $100,000. CNA’s bid is nonresponsive, CNA is not in line
for award and it therefore lacks standing herein.

        The Board declines to grant the District’s motion for sanctions and attorneys fees at this
time. We note, however, that CNA’s allegations of collusion in this protest are dangerously
close to the conduct that warranted the warning we gave to CNA in CAB No. P-0826, (Feb. 5,
2010). Both the PPA and the Board’s rules provide for sanctions where the Board determines
that a protest is frivolous:

       The Board may dismiss, at any stage of the proceedings, any protest, portion of
       a protest, it deems frivolous. In addition, the Board may require the protester to
       pay the agency attorney fees, at the rate of $100 per hour, for the time counsel
       spent representing the agency in defending the frivolous protest or its frivolous
       parts. If the entire protest is dismissed on frivolous grounds, it may also assess
       the protester damages for each day the contract was suspended equal to the
       amount of liquidated damages specified in the contract for late completion of
       the contract. The Board shall not determine damages, if liquidated damages are
       not specified in the contract. In addition, counsel for the protester may be
       suspended or barred from practicing before the Board.

D.C. Code § 2-309.08(g); Board Rule 308.2. The Board encourages the pro se protester herein
to carefully review Board rules before commencing further protest actions against the District.

        Finally, the Board notes that the protester filed a Motion to Submit Bid Bond on January
31, 2011 (after the bid opening herein). The Board is not the correct entity to which a bid bond
should be filed. Bid bonds should be filed in accordance with the requirements of the District’s
solicitation.
                                             -4-                                CNA Corporation
                                                                                CAB No. P-0875




                                        CONCLUSION

        We dismiss the protest with prejudice.

        SO ORDERED.

DATED: March 14, 2011                              /s/ Marc D. Loud, Sr.
                                                   MARC D. LOUD, Sr.
                                                   Chief Administrative Judge


CONCURRING:

/s/ Warren J. Nash
WARREN J. NASH
Administrative Judge



Electronic Service:

John C. Cheeks
CNA Corporation
1110 6th Street N.W.
Washington, D.C. 20001

Alton Woods, Esq.
Nancy Hapeman, Esq.
Office of the Attorney General
441 4th Street, N.W., 7th Floor South
Washington, D.C. 20001
