                                    DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA
                                   CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD



PROTEST OF:

Friends of Carter Barron Foundation of the         )
Performing Arts                                    )      CAB No. P-0888
                                                   )
Under Solicitation                                 )
No. DCCF-2011-R-3962-SDA 1                         )


                 OPINION AND ORDER ON DISTRICT’S MOTION TO DISMISS
                   OR IN THE ALTERNATIVE FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT

                                             Filing ID 41840812

        The protester, Friends of Carter Barron Foundation of the Performing Arts, has filed a protest
concerning Request for Proposals No. DCCF-2011-R-3962-SDA 1 (“RFP”) issued by the District’s
Department of Employment Services (“DOES”). The protester argues that the award made to another
bidder is invalid on three separate grounds: (1) the District’s mismanagement of an earlier solicitation led
to unfair competition in the present RFP (Count I); (2) the District failed to notify protester of the award
(Count II); and (3) the District’s decision to issue only two in-school awards was not consistent with
statements to prospective bidders that the budget for the solicitation was four million dollars (Count III).
The District has moved the Board to dismiss Count I and Count III arguing that the protester has failed to
clearly articulate a violation of procurement law, regulation, or RFP provision. In addition, the District
argues that Count II is moot. We deny in part and dismiss in part the protest.

                                             BACKGROUND

        On April 1, 2011, the District’s Office of Contracting and Procurement (“OCP”) issued the RFP
seeking contractors to design and implement an in-school year round youth program providing services
that promote academic achievement, successful graduation, career preparation, and other skills
development goals to 250-500 at risk youth. (District’s Mot. to Dismiss, Ex. 2.)

        There were six revisions to the RFP; each involved an extension of the due date while at least two
changed the technical requirements of the RFP. (Id. at Ex. 4.) The revisions are as follows: (1) on April
14, 2011, the due date was changed from April 22, 2011, to May 4, 2011; (id.) (2) on April 26, 2011,
(Amendment 0001), the due date was extended to May 13, 2011; (id.) (3) on May 9, 2011, (Amendment
0002), the due date was extended to May 27, 2011; (id.) (4) on May 18, 2011, (Amendment 0003), the
RFP was replaced in its entirety and the due date was changed from May 27, 2011, to May 31, 2011; (id.)
(5) on May 26, 2011, (Amendment 0004), technical amendments were made to the RFP and the due date
was extended to June 6, 2011; (id.) (6) the due date was extended for the final time to June 8, 2011, (id.).

        Section B.3.1 of the revised RFP stated:

                For the purpose of this RFP and the ensuing contracts the District will be
                divided into two Service Delivery Areas (SDAs):
                                                                                    Friends of Carter Barron,
                                                                                            CAB No. P-0888

                SDA District 1: Wards 1, 2, 3, and 4.

                SDA District 2: Wards 5, 6, 7, and 8.

                It is the intent of the District to award at least one contract for each of the
                SDAs. The District will award additional contracts based upon program
                needs and availability of funds.
                (Id. at Ex. 2.)

        By the final RFP deadline of June 8, 2011, the District received a total of 11 proposals, including
the proposal from protester. (Id. at Ex. 4.) On August 15, 2011, the District awarded the contract to
Dance Institute of Washington (“Dance Institute”). (Id. at Ex. 5.) The protester filed a protest with this
Board on August 22, 2011, and an amended protest on August 23, 2011 (“Amended Protest”). Notice
regarding the contract award to Dance Institute was not issued until September 12, 2011. (Id. at Ex. 6.)

         In its Amended Protest, protester asserts three independent grounds for its protest of the award:
(1) an earlier solicitation was mismanaged such that bidders in the present solicitation were able to gain
access to the earlier proposal submitted by protester and better compete in the present competition (Count
I); (2) OCP failed to notify protester about the SDA 1 in-school award either electronically or by mail
(Count II); and (3) the District decided to issue only two in-school awards despite informing prospective
bidders that they were competing for a solicitation budgeted at four million dollars (Count III).

         The District filed a motion to dismiss arguing that in Count I and Count III, the protester failed to
articulate an alleged violation of procurement law, regulation or solicitation provision as required
pursuant to CAB Rule 301.1(c). Additionally, the District argues that Count II is moot. The protest is
denied in part and dismissed in part.


                                               DISCUSSION

        We exercise jurisdiction over this protest pursuant to D.C. Code § 2-360.03(a)(1).

Count I: The District’s Mismanagement of an Earlier Solicitation

        Protester asserts that the Board should sustain the protest “[b]ecause the last Solicitation process
stood without appropriate procurement oversight and supervision to lead a non-competitive Performing
Arts Bidder to receive a competitive awarded proposal.” (Am. Protest 3.) The District contends that the
charge is unclear and fails to articulate any alleged violation of procurement law, regulation or solicitation
provision. As such, the District argues that Count I should be dismissed for failure to comply with the
requirements of Board Rule 301.1(c) which provides in pertinent part:

        All protests shall be in writing, addressed to the Board, and shall include the following:

                                                          ...

        (c) a clear and concise statement of the legal and factual grounds of the protest, including copies
        of relevant documents, and citations to statutes, regulations or solicitation provisions claimed to
        be violated.

        However, this Board’s precedent has been to read Rule 301.1(c) very narrowly. We have held
that “[w]here the District believes that a protest ground fails to state a violation of procurement law or

                                                      2
                                                                                       Friends of Carter Barron,
                                                                                               CAB No. P-0888

regulation or is unsupported by the facts, the matter should be addressed through the Agency Report on
the merits in the first instance and the absence of detailed facts concerning an alleged procurement
deficiency in the initial protest filing does not necessarily dictate dismissal.” CUP Temporaries, Inc.,
CAB No. P-0474, 44 D.C. Reg. 6841, 6844 (July 3, 1997). Thus, even where a protester’s allegations are
mainly conclusory or barely supported by fact, where the applicable law and regulations at issue are made
reasonably clear, this Board must address the allegations on the merits. Unfoldment, Inc., CAB No. P-
0435, 44 D.C. Reg. 6377, 6381 (Sept. 12, 1995); see also CUP Temporaries, Inc., CAB No. P-0474, 44
D.C. Reg. at 6844 (denying the protest on the merits rather than dismiss the protest for failure to provide a
clear and concise statement of its factual and legal grounds citing that (1) allegations were reasonably
clear concerning the alleged improprieties of the award decision and the applicable law and regulations
implicated and (2) the District had provided sufficient evidence to rule on the merits of the claim where
the protestor claimed that the evaluation process was flawed due to its extreme brevity of only one day).

         If understood correctly, the protester’s allegation amounts to a claim that during an earlier
October 2010 solicitation1, the protester submitted a bid and that bid was subsequently obtained and used
by the awardee, Dance Institute, in this solicitation in order to win the present contract. Although lacking
in clarity, protester’s argument is sufficient to show an allegation of a violation of D.C. Code § 2-354.172
which states:

                 The CPO shall review information which has been designated as
                 confidential or proprietary by a person and which has been submitted in
                 response to an Invitation for Bids or Request for Proposals. If the CPO
                 determines that the designation is proper, the information shall be treated
                 by the CPO, and any other District employee, in a confidential manner,
                 shall be disclosed only to District employees for use in the procurement
                 process, and shall not be disclosed to other persons or parties without
                 prior written consent of the person . . . .

         In addition, protester’s charge necessitates improper conduct by District government employees
in the course of the RFP process. The conduct of District employees is governed by the District of
Columbia municipal regulations as set forth in Title 6, Chapter 18. Specifically, “[i]t is the policy of the
District government to avoid conflicts of interest concerning the award, implementation, monitoring, and
performance of contracts for services.” D.C. Mun. Regs., tit. 6-B, § 1803.14 (2011). Since this claim
entails an alleged violation of the statute and the regulation, we shall address it on the merits.

         Based on a review of the record, it is clear that the protester has not met its burden of proof on
this allegation. Protester has had at least four opportunities to set forth its record before the Board: the
initial protest, the Amended Protest, the response to the District’s motion to dismiss, and the second
response to the motion to dismiss. Protester has alleged but provided no evidence to support its claim that
the October 2010 request for proposal process enabled noncompetitive contractors to obtain access to its
proposal. Protester has stated that it was the “only” competitive bidder in the October 2010 solicitation
and that Dance Institute was not competitive at that time. (Protester’s Second Resp. to District’s Mot. to
Dismiss 2, Oct. 25, 2011.) Thus, protester assumes that Dance Institute obtained a copy of protester’s
earlier proposal in order to become the winning bidder in the present solicitation. However, in support of
its claim, protester has submitted its Past Performance Data only, and mere surmise is an inadequate basis

1
  Throughout its filings with this Board, the protester has interchangeably referred to the earlier solicitation as
having occurred in October 2010 and October 2011. (Compare Protest 1 with protester’s Second Resp. to District’s
Mot. To Dismiss 2.) This Board is proceeding under the assumption that the earlier solicitation referenced by
protester occurred in October 2010.
2
  D.C. Code § 2-354.17 was enacted April 8, 2011.

                                                         3
                                                                                    Friends of Carter Barron,
                                                                                            CAB No. P-0888

upon which protester’s case must be made. In the past, this Board has held that a protest must not be
based merely on conjecture or speculation, or a mere expression of disagreement with the contracting
agency’s decision. Metropolitan Pest Control, Inc., CAB No. P-0123, 38 D.C. Reg. 2958, 2959 (July 28,
1989). Furthermore, protester has even failed to show that its October 2010 proposal was designated as
“confidential” or “proprietary” as that proposal was not submitted to the Board for review of its
confidential or proprietary designation. Accordingly, there is no evidence to show any breach of
confidentiality under the statute and no evidence to show any regulatory violation due to improper
District employee conduct.

        We find that the protester has failed to provide any facts or documents to support its allegation of
improper procurement procedures during the earlier solicitation that resulted in its disadvantage in the
present RFP process. Therefore, Count I is denied.

Count II. The District’s Failure to Give Notice of Award

         When this protest was filed on August 23, 2011, the District had not yet informed offerors that an
award had been made to Dance Institute. Protester asserts that the District’s failure to give notice of the
award to offerors provides a basis upon which to sustain the protest. And, by its own admission, the
District did not inform offerors of the August 15, 2011 award until September 12, 2011. However, the
District argues that this ground is moot as the District has, since the initial filing of this protest, provided
notice of the contract award.

        The municipal regulations governing the procurement process in the District require that the
contracting officer notify unsuccessful bidders promptly that their bids were not accepted. See, 27
DCMR §1544.4. Prompt notice is a procedural requirement which is expected to be observed. John E.
Kelly & Sons Elec. Constr., Inc., CAB No. P-0214, 38 D.C. Reg. 3065 (May 24, 1990). Our primary
concern with giving notice of award to unsuccessful bidders is that “delays [in providing notice] create
uncertainty as to whether a protester received knowledge of an award and consequently introduce
unnecessary issues before the Board as to the timeliness of protests.” In re Horton & Barber Prof’l Servs.,
Inc., CAB No. P-0634, 49 D.C. Reg. 3333, 3338 (Feb. 21, 2001).

        In the instant case, the policy concerns raised in Horton are not at issue. Despite not having
received official notice from the District, the protester filed its protest with the Board within four business
days of the award to Dance Institute. While we do not support what appears to be an inexplicable month
long delay in providing notice, the protester was not injured by not receiving timely notice and has, at this
time, received official notice. Accordingly, Count II is dismissed as moot.

Count III. The District’s Decision to Issue Two In-School Awards

         In Count III, protester alleges that the District’s decision to issue only two in-school awards
violated the terms of the solicitation. Protester asserts that during pre-proposal conferences, the District
stated that the budget for the solicitation was four million dollars. However, the District contends that
this protest basis is untimely in that the District’s choice to award only one contract for each SDA was
clearly stated in the RFP.

        Section B.3.1 of the revised RFP stated:

                 For the purpose of this RFP and the ensuing contracts the District will be
                 divided into two Service Delivery Areas (SDAs):

                 SDA District 1: Wards 1, 2, 3, and 4.

                                                       4
                                                                                    Friends of Carter Barron,
                                                                                            CAB No. P-0888


                SDA District 2: Wards 5, 6, 7, and 8.

                It is the intent of the District to award at least one contract for each of the
                SDAs. The District will award additional contracts based upon program
                needs and availability of funds.
                (District’s Mot. to Dismiss, Ex. 2.)

        Based on the above RFP provision, the District intended to award at least one contract for each
SDA but was under no obligation to award any additional contracts. To the extent that protester took
issue with the language as set forth in the RFP, in light of statements made by OCP personnel during the
conduct of the RFP, such alleged improprieties in the solicitation were readily apparent prior to bid
opening or the time set for receipt of proposals. Under D.C. Code § 2-360.08(b)(1), a protest based on
alleged improprieties which are apparent prior to bid opening must be filed with the Board prior to bid
opening or the time set for receipt of initial proposals.

          This Board has held that “in order to timely challenge the terms of a solicitation, the protest
must be filed prior to the closing date for receipt of proposals or bid opening.” Unfoldment, Inc., CAB
No. P-0358, 41 D.C. Reg. at 3659; see also Int’l Builders, Inc., CAB No. P-0661, 50 D.C. Reg. 7461
(Oct. 11, 2002). As noted, the protests herein were filed on August 22 and August 23 (amended), 2011,
respectively; whereas the proposal closing date was June 8, 2011. Consequently, this protest charge is
untimely.

        Moreover, this Board has the responsibility to determine whether the solicitation or award was in
accord with the applicable law, regulations and terms and conditions of the solicitation. Recycling
Solutions, Inc., CAB No. P-0377, 42 D.C. Reg. 4550 (April 15, 1994). We find that there is no violation
of procurement laws, regulations, or solicitation provision in the District’s decision to award just one
contract per service area. To the contrary, the District’s decision to award one contract per service area
was consistent with the terms of the RFP. Therefore, Count III of the protest is denied.

        SO ORDERED.


DATED: January 12, 2012                                    /s/ Maxine E. McBean
                                                           MAXINE E. MCBEAN
                                                           Administrative Judge

CONCURRING:

/s/ Marc D. Loud, Sr.
MARC D. LOUD, SR.
Chief Administrative Judge


/s/ Monica S. Parchment
MONICA S. PARCHMENT
Administrative Judge



Electronic Service:

                                                      5
                                        Friends of Carter Barron,
                                                CAB No. P-0888


Talia S. Cohen, Esq.,
Janice N. Skipper, Esq.,
Howard Schwartz, Esq.,
Assistant Attorney Generals
441 4th Street, N.W., Suite 700S
Washington, D.C. 20001

Gloria J. Hightower
President
Friends of Carter Barron
Foundation of the Performing Arts
1234 Massachusetts Avenue. NW
Washington, D.C. 20009




                                    6
