              DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD


PROTEST OF:

AAA TERMITE & PEST CONTROL                            )
                                                      )       CAB No. P-0828
Solicitation No: DCAM-2009-B-0055                     )

        For the Protester: Mr. Michael Wanamaker, pro se, AAA Termite & Pest Control. For the
District of Columbia Government: Alton E. Woods, Esq., Assistant Attorney General, Office of
the Attorney General.

      Opinion by Chief Administrative Judge Jonathan D. Zischkau, with Administrative Judge
Warren J. Nash, concurring.

                                           OPINION
                                         Filing ID 28406256


        AAA Termite & Pest Control has protested the determination that its bid was
nonresponsive for failing to acknowledge two solicitation amendments. AAA Termite had
downloaded the solicitation from the Office of Contracting and Procurement (“OCP”) website
but failed to check the website prior to submitting its bid for any amendments. The contracting
officer states that bidders who picked up a printed copy of the solicitation from OCP were mailed
the amendments but firms that downloaded the solicitation were not known to OCP. Thus, OCP
could not mail amendments to firms which had downloaded the solicitation from the website and
were not on the bidders list. We conclude that the contracting officer did not violate law,
regulation, or the terms of the solicitation by determining AAA Termite’s bid to be
nonresponsive. Having chosen to obtain the solicitation from the OCP website, it was AAA
Termite’s responsibility to check the same OCP website for any amendments to the solicitation.
Accordingly, we deny the protest.

                                       BACKGROUND

        On August 28, 2009, the District’s Department of Real Estate Services (“DRES”) issued
Invitation for Bids (“IFB”) No. DCAM-2009-B-0055 for pest control services for various
District Government properties. (Agency Report (“AR”), at 2; AR Ex. 2). This IFB was posted
on OCP’s website on August 28, 2009. The IFB could either be picked up from DRES’s bid
room or downloaded from OCP’s website. AAA Termite most likely downloaded an electronic
copy of the solicitation from the OCP website between August 28, 2009, and September 21,
2009, that is, at some point before the first amendment was posted at the website on September
22, 2009. Bidders that picked up a printed copy of the solicitation from the DRES bid room
were added to the bidders list. Firms that downloaded the solicitation from the OCP website
were not added to the bidders list though presumably a firm could have asked to be added to the
bidders list so that it could receive amendments by mail from the contracting agency.

       The solicitation provides inter alia in section L.2 (entitled “Pre-Bid Conference”):
                                                -2-                     AAA Termite & Pest Control
                                                                                  CAB No. P-0828


       All oral questions must be submitted in writing following the close of the pre-bid
       conference but no later than five working days after the pre-bid conference in
       order to generate an official answer. Official answers will be provided in writing
       to all prospective bidders who are listed on the official bidder’s list as having
       received a copy of the solicitation. Answers will also be posted on the OCP
       website at www.ocp.dc.gov.

(AR Ex. 2). Section L.12 provides that any responses to bidders’ questions would be provided in
an amendment. Bidders were notified of the need to acknowledge IFB amendments in IFB
section L.16 (entitled “Acknowledgment of Amendments”):

       The Bidder shall acknowledge receipt of any amendment to this solicitation by (a)
       signing and returning the amendment; (b) by identifying the amendment number
       and date in the space provided for this purpose in item 20 of page 1 (Solicitation,
       Offer, Award Form) of the solicitation; or (c) by letter or telegram, including
       mailgrams. The District must receive the acknowledgment by the date and time
       specified for receipt of bids. Bidder’s failure to acknowledge an amendment may
       result in rejection of the bid.

(AR Ex. 2) (emphasis in original). AAA Termite attended the pre-bid conference on September
8, 2009 (see District’s Determination to Proceed with Contract Performance, filed Nov. 10,
2009), but never had itself added to the bidders list. Amendment No. 1, posted on OCP’s
website on September 22, 2009, addressed questions posed by the bidders, added buildings to
each of the two groups of facilities, and revised the pricing schedule. (AR Ex. 4). Amendment
No. 2, posted on OCP’s website on September 24, 2009, answered additional questions and again
revised the pricing schedule. (AR Ex. 5). In addition to posting the amendments on the OCP
website, the two amendments were mailed by OCP’s staff to the vendors listed on the official
bidders list. Because AAA Termite had downloaded the IFB from the OCP website, it did not
appear on the bidders list. AAA Termite failed to check the OCP website during the period
leading up to the bid opening date of September 30, 2009, and thus it states that it was not aware
of the two amendments. On September 30, 2009, five bids were publicly opened with AAA
Termite the apparent low bidder. (AR Ex. 1). Because AAA Termite failed to acknowledge the
two amendments as set forth in IFB section L.16, and in 27 DCMR § 1517.1 (see AR Ex. 8), the
contracting officer determined its bid to be nonresponsive in a letter dated October 1, 2009:

       It is the responsibility of the bidders to check the OCP website through the
       duration of the advertised period and to be aware of amendments made to the
       solicitation. As your bid did not acknowledge the above mentioned amendments
       to the subject solicitation, the District finds the bid submitted by AAA Termite
       and Pest Control non-responsive to the District requirements; and therefore, will
       not be considered for a contract award.

(AR Ex. 3). On October 1, 2009, the contracting officer issued letters of intent to award
contracts to the next two low bidders, Configuration, Inc., and Dixon Termite & Pest
Management, Inc. (AR Ex. 9). On October 6, 2009, DRES’s deputy director received a call
from a representative of AAA Termite asserting that its bid was responsive and that it had not
                                                 -3-                     AAA Termite & Pest Control
                                                                                   CAB No. P-0828


been notified of the two amendments. (Id.). The contracting officer issued a notice the same day
cancelling the solicitation. (AR Ex. 6). After a review of the matter and consultation with the
Office of the Attorney General, the contracting officer determined that she could proceed with
award to bidders other than AAA Termite on the basis that AAA Termite was responsible for
checking the OCP website for amendments. (AR at 3; AR Ex. 9). On October 14, 2009, the
contracting officer notified all bidders that she was rescinding the October 6 cancellation and that
the contract award would proceed. (AR Ex. 7). On October 15, 2009, AAA Termite filed its
protest.

                                          DISCUSSION

       We exercise jurisdiction over this protest pursuant to D.C. Code § 2-309.03 (a)(1).

       AAA Termite argues that the contracting officer’s determination finding it nonresponsive
was legally erroneous because the solicitation failed to notify bidders that they should check the
OCP website for postings of IFB amendments. AAA Termite also argues that the procurement
was flawed in that some bidders were mailed the amendments while others (including AAA
Termite) were not. The District responds that it was AAA Termite’s responsibility to check the
OCP website for possible amendments to the IFB because it had downloaded the IFB from the
same OCP website. Because the contracting officer only had a bidders list of firms that had
obtained a printed copy of the IFB from the DRES bid room, the District points out that the
contracting officer could not know the bidders who had downloaded the IFB from the OCP
website.

        The Procurement Practices Act requires effective competition and fair and equitable
treatment of all persons involved in District procurements. D.C. Code § 2-301.01. In order to
further these goals, a contracting agency has an affirmative obligation to use reasonable methods
for the dissemination of solicitation documents, including amendments, to prospective
contractors. Southern Maryland Restoration, Inc., CAB No. P-0459, Sept. 20, 1996, 44 D.C.
Reg. 6503, 6506; U.S. Pollution Control, Inc., B-248910, Oct. 8, 1992, 92-2 CPD ¶ 231;
Electromagnetix Corp., B-249623, Oct. 29, 1992, 92-2 CPD ¶ 295. Prospective bidders have a
duty to avail themselves of every reasonable opportunity to obtain solicitation documents.
Southern Maryland Restoration, Inc., 44 D.C. Reg. at 6506; Optelec U.S., Inc., B-400349, Oct.
16, 2008, 2008 U.S. Comp. Gen. LEXIS 178 (GAO held that Optelec “alone was responsible for
monitoring the website for the posting of the solicitation”); Republic Floors, Inc., 70 Comp. Gen.
567, 91-1 CPD ¶ 579. Normally, a prospective contractor bears the risk of not receiving a
solicitation amendment, unless it is shown that the contracting agency made a deliberate effort to
prevent the firm from competing, or even if not deliberate, there is evidence that the agency
failed to provide the amendment after the firm availed itself of every reasonable opportunity to
obtain it. Crown Management Services, Inc., B-232431.4, Apr. 20, 1989, 89-1 CPD ¶ 393. A
prospective bidder's nonreceipt of a solicitation amendment, and subsequent elimination from the
competition, will not justify disrupting a procurement, unless evidence exists that the agency
failed to comply with the applicable regulations governing the distribution of amendments.
Irwin-Jurkewiecz Corp., B-249037, Oct. 20, 1992, 92-2 CPD ¶ 257.
                                                 -4-                     AAA Termite & Pest Control
                                                                                   CAB No. P-0828


         In the present protest, AAA Termite does not argue that it was unreasonable for DRES to
post the original IFB at OCP’s website for prospective contractors to download. Nor does AAA
Termite deny that the OCP website warns prospective contractors to check the OCP website
daily for any amendments to the posted solicitations. Having opted to download the IFB from
the website, and knowing that the downloading function is structured so that the downloading
entity remains anonymous to the contracting agency, AAA Termite should have realized that the
only way for the contracting agency to communicate an amendment to it would be by posting the
amendments at the same OCP website containing the original IFB. Alternatively, if AAA
Termite wanted to assure itself of receiving a written notice specifically directed to it, then it
should have contacted DRES and had its name added to the official bidders list. The record
demonstrates that AAA Termite did not take this measure. Although it would have been
reasonable for DRES contracting officials to add to the official bidders list both AAA Termite
and the other firm which attended the September 8 pre-bid conference, that was not done.
Nevertheless, the agency did not violate procurement law by failing to add these contractors to
the bidders list. It was AAA Termite’s responsibility to have itself added to the bidders list if it
wanted amendments to be mailed to it. In sum, by failing to check the OCP website for IFB
amendments and by failing to have its name added to the bidders list, AAA Termite did not avail
itself of every reasonable opportunity to obtain the amendments.

       AAA Termite failed to respond to the agency report so we deem it to concede that the
amendments made material changes to the scope of work and price schedule. The amendments
added additional buildings to the statement of work requirements and revised the price schedule.
These were material changes such that the failure of AAA Termite to acknowledge the
amendments could not be considered a minor informality which could be waived by the
contracting officer. By not acknowledging the two amendments, AAA Termite was not legally
bound to the IFB requirements as amended, thus rendering its bid nonresponsive. Northern
Sealcoting & Paving, Inc., B-299393, Mar. 30, 2007, 2007 CPD ¶ 67.

                                         CONCLUSION

        For the reasons discussed above, we deny the protest of AAA Termite of the contracting
officer’s determination that its bid was nonresponsive for failing to acknowledge the IFB
amendments.

       SO ORDERED.

DATED: December 8, 2009                                /s/ Jonathan D. Zischkau
                                                       JONATHAN D. ZISCHKAU
                                                       Chief Administrative Judge

CONCURRING:


/s/ Warren J. Nash
WARREN J. NASH
Administrative Judge
