              DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD

PROTEST OF:

MICON CONSTRUCTIONS                          )
                                             )        CAB No. P-0857
Solicitation No: DCAM-2010-B-0133            )


       For the Protester, Micon Constructions, Inc.: Operations Director Steven D. Gray, pro
se. For the District of Columbia Government: Alton Woods, Esq., Assistant Attorney General,
Office of the Attorney General.

      Opinion by Administrative Judge Warren J. Nash, with Chief Administrative Judge Marc
D. Loud, Sr., concurring.

                                           OPINION
                                         Filing ID 37689892


       On June 30, 2010, Micon Constructions (“Micon”) protested a contracting officer’s
determination that Micon’s bid was nonresponsive because the bid did not include information
regarding Micon’s experience in meeting the special standards of responsibility set forth in
Section C.5 of the solicitation. Micon contends that its failure to provide the information could
have been corrected as a minor informality. The contracting officer subsequently rescinded the
June 22, 2010, letter, and stated that as a result of bid reevaluation, Micon was nonetheless
determined to be nonresponsible in accordance with 27 DCMR §§ 2200.1-2200.5, based on lack
of appropriate experience, and nonresponsive, based on failure to provide an adequate
subcontracting plan. Micon did not respond to the District’s motion to dismiss. As the District
rescinded its nonresponsiveness determination of June 22, 2010, that effectively moots the basis
of Micon’s protest. Moreover, Micon has not responded to the subsequent nonresponsibility
determination issued by the contracting officer.          Because the latter nonresponsibility
determination violates neither the law nor the terms of the solicitation on the record before us,
we sustain the contracting officer’s determination and deny the protest.

                                       BACKGROUND

       On May 24, 2010, the District of Columbia’s Department of Real Estate Services
(“DRES”) Contracting and Procurement Division (“CPD”) issued Solicitation No. DCAM-2010-
B-0113 (“IFB”) in the open market, with a SBE subcontracting set-aside, for the construction of
the Girard Street Family Shelter located at 1413 Girard Street, NW, in Washington DC. (Agency
Report (“AR”); AR Ex.1). There were three amendments issued to the IFB. (AR Ex. 1).

        On June 14, 2010, bids were publicly opened by CPD with six bidders responding to the
IFB. (AR Ex. 4). Molina Construction (“Molina”) submitted the lowest bid of $217,500.00 in
section B.5 of the IFB, but in the Price Breakdown Form in section B.6, the lump sum price of
Molina’s bid was $1,032,750.00. (AR Ex. 4). The Contracting Officer could not determine
Molina’s actual bid amount, and she rejected Molina’s bid as not responsive to the IFB.
Molina’s bid also failed to provide the information requested in section C.5 of the IFB, and the
Contracting Officer (“CO”) determined that the bid was not responsive. (AR Ex. 4).
                                                -2-                            Micon Constructions
                                                                                  CAB No. P-0857




        The second low bid was submitted by Micon with a bid price of $1,251,606.97. (AR Ex.
2). However, the CO initially rejected Micon’s bid as nonresponsive for failing to provide all of
the information required in section C.5 of the IFB. (AR Ex. 4). On June 23, 2010, the CO
informed Micon by email and by letter that its bid had been rejected as nonresponsive. (AR Ex.
3).

        On June 30, 2010, the CAB docketed this protest in which Micon challenged the CO’s
nonresponsiveness determination. On July 1, 2010, the CO, in a letter to Micon, rescinded the
earlier determination that Micon’s bid was nonresponsive. The CO determined that Micon’s bid
did not include any information regarding a minimum of two projects that were similar in size
and scope to the Girard Street family shelter. The CO rejected the bid and found it
nonresponsible. (AR Ex. 5). The CO also concluded that Micon’s bid was not responsive to the
solicitation because the bid failed to provide a completed subcontracting plan which included all
of the required information. (AR Ex. 5). Micon’s Subcontracting Plan submitted with its bid
failed to include the contract value, the amount of the contract (excluding the cost of materials,
goods, supplies and equipment), the amount of all subcontracts, LSDBE totals, and the
percentage of set-asides. (AR Ex. 2). Micon did not respond to the CO’s July 1, 2010, letter that
rescinded the initial nonresponsive determination and found Micon to be nonresponsible.

                                         DISCUSSION

       We exercise jurisdiction over this protest pursuant to D.C. Code § 2-309.03 (a)(1).

        Because the contracting officer rescinded his June 22, 2010 determination that Micon
was nonresponsive for failing to provide all of the information required in section C.5 of the IFB,
that portion of the protest is moot. The District initially determined that Micon’s bid was not
responsive to the IFB because the bid did not include any information in response to Section C.5
of the solicitation. (AR Ex. 3). Micon filed this protest on June 30, 2010. Subsequently, the CO
reconsidered the determination of nonresponsiveness, and determined that Micon’s bid did not
provide the information regarding prior projects required in Section C.5 of the specifications,
Special Standards of Responsibility. (AR Ex. 5). The District rejected the bid as
nonresponsible. In the District’s procurement regulations regarding responsibility, 27 DCMR
§2200.5 states that “to be found responsible, a prospective contractor shall meet all of the
following requirements:

       (a) Financial resources adequate to perform the contract, or the ability to obtain
       them;
       (b) Ability to comply with the required or proposed delivery or performance
       schedule, taking into consideration all existing commercial and governmental
       business commitments;
       (c) A satisfactory performance record;
       (d) A satisfactory record of integrity and business ethics;
       (e) The necessary organization, experience, accounting and operational controls,
       and
       technical skills, or the ability to obtain them;
       (f) Compliance with the applicable District licensing and tax laws and regulations;
                                                 -3-                            Micon Constructions
                                                                                   CAB No. P-0857


       (g) The necessary production, construction, and technical equipment and facilities
       or the ability to obtain them; and
       (h) Other qualifications and eligibility criteria necessary to receive the award
       under applicable laws and regulations.

       The contractor has the burden of establishing its responsibility and “in the absence of
information clearly indicating that a prospective contractor is responsible, the contracting officer
shall make a determination of nonresponsibility.” 27 DCMR §2200.3; Goel Services, Inc., CAB
No. P-0804, Feb. 2, 2010. Here, the contracting officer determined that Micon did not provide
evidence of experience required by the solicitation, and the contracting officer rejected the bid.

        Additionally, the CO determined that Micon’s bid was not responsive because it did not
contain requested information regarding Micon’s subcontracting plan. Micon did not respond to
the District’s motion to dismiss the protest as moot, filed July 22, 2010. Micon also failed to
rebut the CO’s determination of July 1, 2010, rescinding the original action, but finding Micon to
be both nonresponsive and nonresponsible. Thus, we see no reason to overturn the contracting
officer’s determination of nonresponsiveness and nonresponsibility.

                                         CONCLUSION

       Micon has not rebutted the contracting officer’s reasons for determining Micon’s bid to
be nonresponsive and nonresponsible. Accordingly, we deny the protest.

SO ORDERED.

DATED: May 19, 2011                                    /s/ Warren J. Nash
                                                       WARREN J. NASH
                                                       Administrative Judge

CONCURRING:

/s/ Marc D. Loud, Sr.
MARC D. LOUD, Sr.
Chief Administrative Judge


Electronic Service:

Robert L. Dillard
Assistant Attorney General                             Mr. Samual O Akinwade
441 4th Street, N.W., 6th Floor South                  President
Washington, D.C. 20001                                 Micon Constructions
                                                       1818 New York Avenue N.E., Suite 218
                                                       Washington, DC 20002
