               DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD



PROTEST OF:

OHMS ENERGY COMPANY, LLC                              )
                                                      )       CAB No. P-0807
Under IFB No. DCAM-2009-B-7003                        )

       For Ohms Energy Company, LLC: Mr. Sheirmiar White, pro se. For the District of
Columbia Government: Talia Sasson Cohen, Esq., Assistant Attorney General, Office of the
Attorney General.

      Opinion by Chief Administrative Judge Jonathan D. Zischkau, with Administrative Judge
Warren J. Nash, concurring.

                              OPINION DISMISSING PROTEST
                                         Filing ID 26475091

        Ohms Energy Company, LLC, protests the failure of the Office of Contracts and
Procurement (“OCP”) to issue the subject solicitation for electricity supply as a set aside
procurement and otherwise comply with the requirements of the Small, Local, and
Disadvantaged Business Enterprise Development and Assistance Act of 2005, D.C. Code §§ 2-
218.46, 2-218.47, and 2-218.52. The District has moved to dismiss the protest as untimely since
the protest was filed over two months after the bid opening date. Ohms has not responded to the
motion. We deem the motion as conceded and in any event the record clearly shows that Ohms’
challenge of the solicitation is untimely. Accordingly, we dismiss the protest.


                                        BACKGROUND

        On February 13, 2009, OCP issued on behalf of the Office of Property Management
(“OPM”), IFB No. DCAM-2009-B-7003 in the open market for a contractor to provide
electricity supply for an annual load of approximately 400,000,000 kilowatt hours. (Agency
Report (“AR”) at 2; AR Ex. 1). The IFB provided for a reverse auction whereby only bidders
that met certain eligibility requirements were permitted to participate in the reverse auction.
(Id.). In addition, while the IFB contemplated the award of one requirements contract for the
supply of electricity for OPM accounts, both the energy purchasers under the DC Municipal
Aggregation Program and the Metropolitan Council of Governments could (i) issue their own
invitation for bid and execute their own contracts or (ii) negotiate a price under the IFB and issue
a separate order. (Id.). The original deadline for the submission of bid packages was March 16,
2009. By Amendment A0001, dated March 13, 2009, the District extended the date for the
submission of bid packages to March 20, 2009. Through subsequent amendments, the District
extended the date for the submission of bid packages to March 24, 2009. (Id.).
                                               -2-             Ohms Energy Co., LLC, CAB No. P-0807


       Section 1.3 of the IFB provided that “Bidders interested in participating in this IFB shall
comply with the Eligibility Criteria as defined in Section 2 and shall submit a Bid as described in
Section 4.” Once OCP determined that a bidder met the eligibility criteria as listed in section 2
of the IFB, then that bidder could participate in the reverse auction. Section 2, entitled
“Eligibility Criteria”, provided as follows:

       In order to bid each Bidder must possess and submit the following with its Bid
       Package:

       i. Evidence that the Bidder is licensed by the District of Columbia Public Service
       Commission to provide Electricity Supply;
       ii. Evidence that the bidder possesses a Federal Energy Regulatory Commission
       (FERC) power marketing license. Bidders must include FERC Docket No., Date
       of Application, and Date of Approval;
       iii. Evidence that the Bidder has firm transmission service agreements in the
       Bidder’s name with the Pennsylvania, New Jersey, Maryland Interconnection,
       L.L.C (“PJM”) for the interconnection points between the applicable Local
       Distribution Utility “LDU”, as defined in Section 6.1, system and PJM to effect
       delivery to the Delivery Points of the contract; and
       iv. Signed acceptance of the Fee Schedule. Attached herein as ATTACHMENT
       G.

(AR Ex. 1).

       On March 24, 2009, the date for the submission of the bid packages, OCP received bids
from the following six bidders: Constellation New Energy Power, Gexa Energy DC, LLC, Hess
Corporation, Ohms, Pepco Energy Services, Inc., and Washington Gas Energy Services, Inc.
(AR Ex. 2). On May 12, 2009, OCP requested from all six bidders additional responsibility data.
On May 18, 2009, OCP received responses from the following four bidders: Gexa, Hess, Pepco,
and Washington Gas. On June 1, 2009, OCP conducted the reverse auction and on June 2, 2009,
awarded Contract No. DCAM-2009-R-7003, to Washington Gas. (AR at 3; AR Ex. 2). Because
Ohms failed to comply with the responsibility data request, the District found Ohms
nonresponsible, and Ohms thus did not participate in the reverse auction. Ohms filed its protest
on June 1, 2009. The District moved to dismiss the protest as untimely on June 29, 2009. Ohms
was given an extension of time to respond but has never responded to the motion.

                                         DISCUSSION

        Ohms’s protest is not a model of clarity but Ohms appears to contend that the IFB fails to
satisfy the requirements of the Small, Local, and Disadvantaged Business Enterprise
Development and Assistance Act of 2005, D.C. Code §§ 2-218.46, 2- 218.48, and 2-218.52. The
District responds that the protest is untimely since Ohms failed to file the protest with the Board
prior to bid opening and waited until over two months after bid opening to file its protest. If a
                                                -3-             Ohms Energy Co., LLC, CAB No. P-0807


protest is based upon alleged improprieties in a solicitation, the Procurement Practices Act
requires the protester to file its protest prior to bid opening. D.C. Code § 2-309.08(b)(1) states in
relevant part: “A protest based upon alleged improprieties in a solicitation which are apparent
prior to bid opening or the time set for receipt of initial proposals shall be filed prior to bid
opening or the time set for receipt of initial proposals.”

       It is clear from the facts that Ohms waited until after bid opening to file its protest
challenging the terms of the solicitation. By not responding to the motion to dismiss, we deem
the motion as conceded by Ohms. In any event, the record shows that Ohms’ protest is untimely.

       Accordingly, we dismiss the protest.


       SO ORDERED.


DATE: August 6, 2009                                          /s/ Jonathan D. Zischkau
                                                              JONATHAN D. ZISCHKAU
                                                              Chief Administrative Judge



CONCURRING:

/s/ Warren J. Nash
WARREN J. NASH
Administrative Judge
