         DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD


PROTEST OF:

KEYSTONE PLUS CONSTRUCTION CORP.                      )
                                                      )       CAB Nos. P-0833
Solicitation No: DCAM-2009-B-0052                     )

       For the Protester: Mr. Carlos Perdomo, pro se. For the District of Columbia Government:
Alton E. Woods, Esq., Assistant Attorney General.

       Opinion by Administrative Judge Warren J. Nash, with Chief Administrative Judge Jonathan
D. Zischkau, concurring.

                                            OPINION
                                         Filing ID 29740668

        Keystone Plus Construction Corporation (“Keystone”) protests the decision of the
contracting officer to reject Keystone’s bid as nonresponsive because Keystone failed to submit a
subcontracting plan as required by Section M.1.9 of the solicitation. The District asserts that the
contracting officer was required to reject the bid as nonresponsive since the subcontracting plan
listed no subcontractor information. We agree with the contracting officer and deny the protest.

                                         BACKGROUND

        On July 29, 2009, the District’s Department of Real Estate Services (“DRES”) issued
Invitation for Bids No. DCAM-2009-B-0052 (“IFB”) in the certified small business enterprise
(“SBE”) set-aside market for build out of the 10th floor office space for the office of the Attorney
General at One Judiciary Square at 441 4th Street, NW. (Agency Report (“AR”) Ex. 1).

       The original solicitation required the following at section L.9.1:

       Any prime contractor responding to the solicitation shall submit, within 5 days of the
       CO’s request, a notarized statement detailing its subcontracting plan. This plan shall
       meet the requirements described under Section M.1.10 of this solicitation.

(AR Ex. 1). Although five amendments were issued to the solicitation, only Amendment 2, issued
on August 24, 2009, is germane to this protest. It provides:

      (1) Section L.9 is hereby deleted in its entirety and is now changed to read as follows:

      (2) Any prime contractor responding to this solicitation shall submit with its bid, a
      notarized statement detailing its subcontracting plan. This plan shall meet the
      requirements described under Section M.1.10 of this solicitation.

(AR Ex. 2). Section M.1.9 of the solicitation includes the following language regarding the
subcontracting plan:
                                                -2-                    Keystone Plus Construction Corp.,
                                                                                       CAB No. P-0833


       Any prime contractor responding to this solicitation shall submit with its bid, a
       notarized statement detailing its subcontracting plan. Bids responding to this IFB
       shall be deemed nonresponsive and shall be rejected if the bidder fails to submit a
       subcontracting plan that is required by the solicitation.…

(AR Ex. 1). Subsections of M.1.9 identify the specific information that must be included in each
subcontracting plan:

       M.1.9.1 A description of the goods and services to be provided by the SBEs…;

       M.1.9.2 A statement of the dollar value of the bid that pertains to the
       subcontract to be performed by SBEs…;

       M.1.9.3 The names and addresses of all proposed subcontractors who are
       SBE’s…;

       M.1.9.4 The name of the individual employed by the prime contractor who will
       administer the subcontracting plan…;

       M.1.9.5 A description of efforts that the prime contractor will make to ensure that
       SBEs, or, if insufficient SBEs are available, that certified business enterprises will
       have an equitable opportunity to compete for subcontracts;

       M.1.9.6 In all subcontracts that offer further subcontracting opportunities,
       assurances that the prime contractor will include a statement, approved by the
       contracting officer, that the subcontractor will adopt a subcontracting plan similar to
       the subcontracting plan required by the contract;

       M.1.9.7 Assurances that the prime contractor will cooperate in any studies or
       surveys that may be required by the contracting officer…;

       M.1.9.7 A list of the type of records the prime contractor will maintain to
       demonstrate procedures adopted to comply with the requirements set forth in the
       subcontracting plan, and assurances that the prime contractor will such records
       available for review upon the District’s request; and

       M.1.9.9 A description of the prime contractor’s recent effort to locate SBEs or, if
       insufficient SBEs are available, certified business enterprises and to award
       subcontracts to them.

(AR Ex. 1).


      Twenty-one bidders responded to the solicitation at the bid opening of September 16, 2009.
Keystone’s bid was the fourth lowest actual bid price, and the third lowest price after evaluation of
                                                -3-                   Keystone Plus Construction Corp.,
                                                                                      CAB No. P-0833


bidder preferences. (AR at 3; AR Ex. 5). Keystone acknowledged receipt of all five amendments.
All bidders with prices lower than Keystone’s were found to be ineligible. In a determination and
findings dated December 10, 2009, the contracting officer found Keystone’s bid to be nonresponsive
since Keystone failed to submit a valid subcontracting plan as required by section M.1.9. (AR Ex.
5). Keystone’s subcontracting plan, signed by its President, Carlos Perdomo, included only the
company’s contact information and tax identification number. Keystone’s plan failed to include any
subcontracting information. Thus, the substantive part of the subcontracting plan was left entirely
blank. (AR Ex. 3). Keystone filed this protest on November 25, 2009, challenging the contracting
officer’s decision to reject its bid as nonresponsive. Keystone asserts that section L.9.1 of the
original solicitation (prior to Amendment 2) is applicable and that the contracting officer had never
requested Keystone to submit its subcontracting plan.

                                          DISCUSSION

        We exercise jurisdiction pursuant to D.C. Code § 2-309.03(a)(1). The main issue presented
in this protest is whether the contracting officer properly determined that Keystone’s incomplete
subcontracting plan furnished with its bid rendered Keystone’s bid nonresponsive.

       D.C. Code §§ 2-218.46(d) and (e) provide:

       (d) Bids or proposals responding to a solicitation, including an open market
       solicitation, shall be deemed nonresponsive and shall be rejected if the solicitation
       requires submission of a certified business enterprise subcontracting plan and the
       prime contractor fails to submit a subcontracting plan as part of its bid or proposal.
       A certified business enterprise subcontracting plan shall specify the following:

           (1) The name and address of the subcontractor;
           (2) Whether the subcontractor is currently certified as a certified business
       enterprise;
           (3) The scope of work to be performed by the subcontractor; and
           (4) The price to be paid by the contractor to the subcontractor.

       (e) No prime contractor shall be allowed to amend the subcontracting plan filed as
       part of its bid or proposal except with the consent of the contracting officer and the
       Director. Any reduction in the dollar volume of the subcontracted portion resulting
       from such amendment of the plan shall insure [sic] to the benefit of the District.

        Our decision in this case is controlled by our recent decision in Keystone Plus Construction
Corp., CAB Nos. 822, 830, 832, Feb. 19, 2010. There is no dispute that subsection 2-218.46(d)
applies to this procurement and the procuring agency. As the facts amply demonstrate, the
solicitation was a set-aside solicitation requiring submission of a certified business enterprise
subcontracting plan. Section M of the solicitation tracks much of the language of D.C. Code § 2-
218.46, including subsection 2-218.46(d). Thus, each bidder was required to submit a complete
subcontracting plan including the name and address, current CBE certification status, scope of work,
and price to be paid, for each subcontractor.
                                                -4-                   Keystone Plus Construction Corp.,
                                                                                      CAB No. P-0833



        Keystone argues that the contracting officer improperly found Keystone’s bid to be
nonresponsive, even though the contracting officer had not requested from Keystone a
subcontracting plan after bid opening, as required by the original Section L.9.1 of the solicitation.
Keystone’s argument ignores the fact that Section L.9.1 was removed from the solicitation by
Amendment 2. Additionally, prior to enactment of D.C. Code § 2-218.46 in 2005, District
procurement law addressed subcontracting plans in bids as a matter of bidder responsibility, not
responsiveness. However, section 2-218.46, in regulating performance and subcontracting
requirements, including SBE participation, mandates that CBE subcontracting plans, under certain
defined circumstances which are applicable here, be a matter of bid responsiveness. Section M,
particularly M.1.9, of the solicitation provides more than adequate clarity that the subcontracting
plan here was a matter of responsiveness. Each bidder in this procurement was required to submit a
CBE subcontracting plan with its bid.

        On the facts presented in the record, Keystone’s subcontracting plan was materially
incomplete so as to render its bid nonresponsive. In its subcontracting plan, Keystone failed to
provide any of the required information in its subcontracting plan. Because Keystone failed to
submit a valid CBE subcontracting plan, Keystone’s bid was rendered nonresponsive pursuant to
D.C. Code § 2-218.46(d). Accordingly, the contracting officer did not err in determining Keystone’s
bid to be nonresponsive.

                                         CONCLUSION

       For the reasons discussed above, we conclude that the contracting officer did not err in
determining Keystone’s bid to be nonresponsive based on a failure to submit a valid subcontracting
plan with its bid. Accordingly, we deny the protest.

       SO ORDERED.

DATED: February 24, 2010                              /s/ Warren J. Nash
                                                      WARREN J. NASH
                                                      Administrative Judge


CONCURRING:

/s/ Jonathan D. Zischkau
JONATHAN D. ZISCHKAU
Chief Administrative Judge
