                                     DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA
                                    CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD



PROTEST OF:
                                                                   )
Urban Alliance Foundation                                          )       CAB Nos.: P-0886, P-0887,
Voices of Our Sisters                                              )                 P-0890, P-0891,
Progressive Educational Experiences in Cooperative Cultures        )                 P-0892
Higher Development Academy                                         )                 (Consolidated)
Jobs for America’s Graduates                                       )
                                                                   )
Solicitation No. DCCF-2011-R-3963-SDA 2                            )


For the protester Urban Alliance: James P. Gallatin, Jr., Lawrence S. Sher, Gregory S. Jacobs, Joelle E.K.
Laszlo, Melissa E. Beras and Stacy C. Forbes, Reed Smith LLP. For the protester Voices of Our Sisters:
Kenya Welch, pro se. For the protester Progressive Educational Experience in Cooperative Cultures: Sara
Stone, pro se. For the protester Higher Development Academy: Deborah Hayman, pro se. For the
protester Jobs for America’s Graduates: Lawrence P. Block, Dennis Lane, and Thorn Pozen, Stinson
Morrison Hecker LLP. For the District of Columbia Government: Talia Sassoon Cohen, Assistant
Attorney General, Office of the Attorney General.

Opinion by Administrative Judge Maxine E. McBean with Chief Administrative Judge Marc D. Loud,
Sr., (concurring with separate opinion) and Administrative Judge Monica C. Parchment concurring.


                                                OPINION
                                           Filing ID 42527096

        Urban Alliance Foundation (“Urban Alliance”) has filed a protest challenging its removal from
the competitive range under a solicitation seeking a contractor to design and implement an in-school
youth workforce development program to support between 250-500 at-risk youths. (AR at Ex.1, §B.1.)
Subsequent to the District’s award of the contract to Synergistic, Inc. (“Synergistic”), four other offerors,
Voices of Our Sisters (“VOOS”), Progressive Educational Experience in Cooperative Cultures
(“PEECC”), Higher Development Academy (“HDA”), and Jobs for America’s Graduates (“JAG”) filed
protests with this Board raising additional protest grounds. On September 2, 2011, the Board issued an
order consolidating the protests. The protesters’ challenges generally concern (a) irregularities with and
cancellation of a procurement process beginning in September 2010, (b) the District’s failure to evaluate
the proposals in accordance with the law and the terms of the solicitation, and (c) non-responsibility of the
awardee, Synergistic. On September 23, 2011, the District filed a motion to dismiss all protests as either
untimely or for lack of standing.

        We find the protests timely and that the protesters have standing. Further, the Board finds that
the District’s Office of Contracting and Procurement (“OCP”) failed to follow proper procedures in
evaluating the proposals. This failure was pervasive and extensive so as to render the final award
decision arbitrary and capricious. Following are four areas where OCP acted inconsistently in terms of
the solicitation and in violation of procurement law: (A) failure to disclose mandatory minimum
requirements, (B) failure to adequately document, (C) failure to evaluate reasonably, and (D) failure to
conduct a blind evaluation. Taken together, these findings constitute sufficient basis for sustaining the
                                                                                        Urban Alliance Foundation, et al.
                                                                                                P-0886, P-0887, P-0890
                                                                                                        P-0891, P-0892

present protest thus the Board finds it unnecessary to address the responsibility of the awardee at this
time. However the irregularities of the evaluation process are sufficiently material so as to warrant
termination of the current contract effective no later than the close of the current school year in June
2012. To the extent that these services are required by the District for the summer school session of 2012
and beyond, the District shall issue a request to the twenty-three offerors for revised technical and cost
proposals for the remainder of the base year and the option years. The District shall evaluate the revised
proposals in accordance with the law and the terms of the RFP. These consolidated protests are sustained.

                                                 BACKGROUND

         On April 1, 2011, OCP issued a Request for Proposals for Solicitation No. DCCF-2011-R-3963-
SDA 2 (“RFP”) for a contractor to design and implement a quality, year-round educational program to
support between 250-500 at-risk youths. 1 (AR at Ex. 1.) Per the RFP, the District intended to issue a
contract consisting of a base year with four additional option years. (AR at Ex 1, §§ F.1-F.2.4.) The RFP
was revised six times prior to the deadline for receipt of proposals on June 8, 2011. (Mot. to Dismiss 3.)
The revisions are as follows: (i) on April 14, 2011, the due date was changed from April 22, 2011, to May
4, 2011; (AR at Ex. 2) (ii) on April 26, 2011, (Amendment 0001), the due date was extended to May 13,
2011; (id.) (iii) on May 9, 2011 (Amendment 0002), the due date was extended to May 27, 2011; (id.) (iv)
on May 18, 2011 (Amendment 0003), the RFP was replaced in its entirety and the due date was extended
to May 31, 2011; (id.) (v) on May 26, 2011 (Amendment 0004), technical amendments were made to
certain sections of the RFP and the due date was extended to June 6, 2011; (id.) and (vi) the due date was
extended for the final time, via E-Sourcing message board, to June 8, 2011, (id.).

Terms of the Solicitation

      Under the Revised RFP, the District of Columbia was divided into two Service Delivery Areas
(“SDAs”):
             SDA 1: Wards 1, 2, 3, and 4
             SDA 2: Wards 5, 6, 7, and 8

                  (AR at Ex. 1, § B.3.1.)

         The RFP stated: “It is the intent of the District to award at least one contract for each of the
SDAs. The District will award additional contracts based upon program needs and availability of
funds.” 2 (Id.) Potential offerors were to submit proposals to design and implement a year-round in-
school youth program to provide services promoting academic achievement, successful graduation,
awareness of and readiness for post-secondary education, career preparation, and connections to
employment. (AR at Ex. 1, § C.1.)

        The RFP further stated that the District would award a contract to the responsible offeror(s)
whose offer(s) is most advantageous to the District (AR at Ex. 1, § M.1.1) based upon the following
technical evaluation criteria: (1) Price Criterion, 10 points; (2) Technical Approach, 50 points, (3)
Technical Expertise, 30 points, (4) Past Performance, 10 points. (AR at Ex. 1, §§ M.3.3.1 – M.3.3.4.) The
evaluation criteria also allowed an additional 10 technical bonus points for in kind/cash match resources
and 12 points for CBE preference, providing for a maximum 122 total points. (AR at Ex. 1, §§ M.3.4.1,
M.3.4.2, M.5.)

1
 This solicitation follows an earlier solicitation issued in September 2010 for the same services. (See, e.g., Urban
Alliance Protest 3, Aug. 10, 2011.)
2
  All protesters in this matter are challenging only the award for SDA 2.

                                                          -2-
                                                                                Urban Alliance Foundation, et al.
                                                                                        P-0886, P-0887, P-0890
                                                                                                P-0891, P-0892

Ratings were to be assigned for each factor according to the scale below:

Numeric Rating    Adjective          Description

       0          Unacceptable       Fails to meet minimum requirements; e.g., no demonstrated capacity,
                                     major deficiencies which are not correctable; offeror did not address
                                     the factor.

       1          Poor               Marginally meets minimum requirements; major deficiencies which
                                     may be correctable.

       2          Minimally          Marginally meets minimum requirements; minor deficiencies which
                  Acceptable         may be correctable.

       3          Acceptable         Meets requirement; no deficiencies.

       4          Good               Meets requirements and exceeds some requirements; no deficiencies.

       5          Excellent          Exceeds most, if not all requirements; no deficiencies.


(AR at Ex. 1, § M.2.)

        According to the Procurement Chronology prepared by Contract Specialist, Crystal Farmer-
Linder, the minimum solicitation requirements were contained in Sections B.3 (B.3.1, B.3.2, B.3.3),
C.5.2, and C.5.2.1. (AR at Ex. 2.) These sections provided:

        § B.3            SERVICE DELIVERY AREAS

        § B.3.1          For the purpose of this RFP and the ensuing contracts the
                         District will be divided into two Service Delivery Areas (SDAs);

                         SDA District 1: Wards 1, 2, 3, and 4.
                         SDA District 2: Wards 5, 6, 7, and 8.

                         It is the intent of the District to award at least one contract for
                         each of the SDAs. The District will award additional contracts
                         based upon program needs and availability of funds.

        § B.3.2          In order for an Offeror to be awarded a contract, the Offeror
                         must serve the entire SDA and the Offeror must operate
                         programming at a location within the SDA. The Offeror is not
                         limited to serving only youth who reside within that SDA and
                         the District reserves the right to refer eligible youth to any
                         Offeror awarded a contract who has capacity at the time.

        § B.3.3          If an Offeror submits proposals for both SDAs, and, if the
                         Offeror is awarded a contract for each SDA, each contract shall
                         stand alone. The awarded Offeror shall not co-mingle funds,


                                                    -3-
                                                                              Urban Alliance Foundation, et al.
                                                                                      P-0886, P-0887, P-0890
                                                                                              P-0891, P-0892

                        personnel, required activities, services or any other contract
                        requirement between the two contracts.

        § C.5.2         YOUTH POPULATION
                        The following youth population shall be targeted:

        § C.5.2.1       The Offeror shall provide services to youth who are most likely
                        to become disconnected. This represents youth who are low-
                        income individuals, between the ages of 14 and 21, and who are
                        currently in school (See Section C.3.12 for a definition of the
                        term “In-School Youth”)

                        (AR at Ex. 1.)

        Subsequently, in the District’s response to this Board’s October 25th request for supplemental
information, the mandatory minimum requirements were further identified as Sections B.3, C.1, C.5.2,
C.5.4.2, and C.5.12.9. (District’s Resp. to Order of the Board Dated Oct. 25 ¶ A [hereinafter Resp. to Bd.
Order].) Notably, the District did not previously identify Sections C.1, C.5.4.2 and C.5.12.9 as mandatory
requirements in either its Motion to Dismiss or in the Procurement Chronology. (See AR at Ex. 2; Mot.
to Dismiss 3.) These sections provide:

        § C.1           SCOPE

                        The Government of the District of Columbia (District), Office of
                        Contracting and Procurement (OCP) on behalf of the Department
                        of Employment Services (DOES), is soliciting Offerors to design
                        and implement quality year-round youth workforce development
                        programs that best meet the needs of District youth and the
                        provisions of the District of Columbia Youth Employment
                        Services Initiative Amendment Act of 2005 and the Workforce
                        Investment Act of (WIA) of 1998. The In-School Year Round
                        Youth Program, supporting between 250-500 youth, will be
                        provided to District of Columbia youth who are at-risk of
                        becoming disconnected.

                        The Offeror shall design and implement a Year Round In-School
                        Youth Program that shall provide services promoting academic
                        achievement, successful graduation, awareness of and readiness
                        for post-secondary education, career preparation, attainment of
                        measurable technical or occupational skills, and connections to
                        employment. The program must focus on drop-out prevention
                        and intervention strategies for youth at-risk of not completing
                        high school for a maximum of fifty (50) youth ages 14 through
                        21, for a minimum of ten (10) and a maximum of fifteen (15)
                        hours per week.

                        During the summer, the program shall provide academic
                        enrichment, career exploration, employment, job readiness, and
                        leadership skills training. The summer component shall support
                        the goal of enhancing the educational and work readiness

                                                   -4-
                                                                              Urban Alliance Foundation, et al.
                                                                                      P-0886, P-0887, P-0890
                                                                                              P-0891, P-0892

                        competencies of youth through innovative learning activities.
                        Youth ages 14-15 will be permitted to work for up to 20 hours
                        per week and youth ages 16-21 will be permitted to work for up
                        to 25 hours per week. Program activities shall conclude by
                        7:00PM and may include weekend activities and training
                        sessions.

        § C.5.4.2       All youth served must meet eligibility criteria detailed in
                        Sections C.5.2 through C.5.2.3.

        § C.5.12.9      For each year that a youth participates in a program, DOES will
                        provide the youth up to $2,625 for wages and/or stipends. Youth
                        may receive up to $50 per week for stipends. Youth may receive
                        wages for work experience for up to 10 weeks a year, for up to
                        20 hours per week (for youth ages 14-15) and up to 25 hours per
                        week (for youth ages 16-21). Youth will be paid $7.25 per hour.

                        (AR at Ex. 1, §§ C.1, C.5.4.2, C.12.9.)

         The RFP detailed the evaluation procedure that was to be used to review the proposals of
offerors. It stated that OCP will “review each proposal to determine its responsiveness. Proposals
determined to be ineligible or nonresponsive will be discarded.” (AR at Ex. 1, § M.3.6.1.) The
solicitation further provided that:

                Each proposal determined to be responsive will be evaluated by a
                technical review team. Teams will evaluate proposals based on the
                Evaluation Factors for Technical Approach (Section M.3.3.2); Technical
                Expertise (Section M.3.3.3); Past Performance (Section M.3.3.4); and
                Technical Bonus Points (M.3.3.5). Team members will represent a range
                of expertise in youth workforce development and may include DOES
                staff; other DC agency staff; and professionals from national and local
                organizations.

                OCP will determine the Price Proposal score based on the evaluation
                formula as described in Section M.3.3.1. The Price Proposal score will
                be combined with the Technical Proposal score once the Technical
                Evaluations have been completed. OCP will also determine whether
                proposals qualify for Preference Points (M.3.4).

                All proposals will be ranked accordingly.

                (AR at Ex. 1, § M.3.6.2.)

        In response to questions from potential offerors, OCP stated: “The offeror’s proposal should be
submitted with the offeror’s identity. OCP will redact the offeror’s identity from the submitted proposals
to ensure a ‘blind’ evaluation process.” (AR at Ex. 1, 30Q.)




                                                   -5-
                                                                              Urban Alliance Foundation, et al.
                                                                                      P-0886, P-0887, P-0890
                                                                                              P-0891, P-0892

The Evaluation of Proposals

        By June 8, 2011, twenty-three offerors submitted proposals in response to the RFP. (Mot. to
Dismiss 3.) As noted, OCP assured bidders in writing that it would conduct a blind evaluation whereby
the names of offerors would be removed. (AR at Ex. 1, 30Q.) Between June 13 and June 24, 2011, the
Technical Evaluation Panel (“Panel”), consisting of three members of DOES, performed independent
reviews of the initial proposals and created a consensus panel report. (AR at Ex. 2.) According to the
Procurement Chronology, each proposal was redacted so that the Panel could perform a blind evaluation.
(AR at Ex. 2.)

        Simultaneously, the Contracting Officer (“CO”) conducted his own review and scoring of each
proposal. (AR at Ex. 2.) Unlike the Panel, the CO’s review was not blind. (Resp. to Bd. Order ¶ L.) And,
despite the inconsistency, there is no evidence that the District informed offerors of this change in
procedure. The three independent scores of the panelists, the Panel’s consensus scores and the CO’s
scores were tabulated and are provided in the Exhibit entitled “Consolidated Twenty-three evaluations
and Bid Tabulation Sheet.” (AR at Ex. 3.)

        The evaluation conducted by the Panel resulted in the following:

                (i)   twelve offerors received a higher score than the awardee, Synergistic;
                (ii)  seven offerors received the same score as Synergistic, including protester Urban
                      Alliance; and
                (iii) three offerors received a lower score than Synergistic. (See generally AR at Ex. 3.)

        However, the CO’s evaluation of the same proposals under the same rubric resulted in the
following:

                (i)   Synergistic received the highest score of any offeror (the CO awarded 29.4 more
                      points to Synergistic than did the Panel); (see AR at Ex. 3, at 53)
                (ii) Urban Alliance received 23.8 points less from the CO than it did from the Panel;
                      (see AR at Ex. 3, at 57)
                (iii) Bidder J’s individual evaluation sheet was marked as unresponsive and appears
                      without scores for any of the evaluation factors, (Resp. to Bd. Order at Ex. C) yet,
                      the CO provided scores for Bidder J in every category for the Bid Tabulation Sheet.
                      (AR at Ex. 3, at 31-32.)

        According to the District, proposals that “clearly demonstrated an inability to meet one or all of
the requirements [stated in Sections B.3, C.5.2, and C.5.2.1]” were immediately removed from the
competitive range by OCP. (AR at Ex. 2.) OCP determined that three offerors were outside the
competitive range: (i) Marquita Anissa Vaughn Foundation, (ii) Urban Alliance, and (iii) United Planning
Organization. (AR at Ex. 2.) Specifically, Urban Alliance was said to not meet the minimum
requirements set forth in Section C.5.2.1. (AR at Ex. 2.)

        A First Round BAFO (“1st BAFO”) was conducted in writing with the remaining twenty offerors,
beginning July 12th and closing July 15th. (AR at Ex. 2.) Seventeen offerors submitted responses to the 1st
BAFO. (AR at Ex. 2.) The Procurement Chronology states that “[i]n most cases, offerors responded to
the noted deficiencies.” (AR at Ex. 2.)

       Citing an inability to reconvene the Panel to review the BAFO proposals in time to meet the
award deadline, the CO scored the BAFO submissions without the assistance of the Panel. (AR at Ex. 2.)

                                                    -6-
                                                                              Urban Alliance Foundation, et al.
                                                                                      P-0886, P-0887, P-0890
                                                                                              P-0891, P-0892

The District states that the CO reviewed the offerors’ original submissions, the original findings of the
Panel, and the offerors’ BAFO submissions in evaluating the 1st BAFO proposals. (AR at Ex. 2.) Despite
the claim that the CO took into account the ratings of the Panel, the technical scores of many offerors
remained unchanged throughout the CO’s evaluation process. In fact, the scores from the CO’s initial
review of proposals remained exactly the same for eight out of seventeen offerors. (See AR at Ex.3.)

         Alluding to budgetary concerns in light of the proposed cost of services under the 1st BAFOs, the
District decided to hold a Second Round BAFO (“2nd BAFO”) with all seventeen remaining offerors. The
2nd BAFO related to pricing only. (AR at Ex. 2.) The 2nd BAFO instructions provided that the “District
sought a per participant cost range between $2,500.00 and $4,500.00.” (AR at Ex. 2.) The request for 2nd
BAFOs was issued July 28, 2011. (AR at Ex. 2.) All seventeen remaining offerors submitted proposals in
response to the District’s request. (AR at Ex. 2.)

        During the 2nd BAFO review, the Contract Specialist “determined that nine of seventeen BAFOs
did not meet the [mandatory] requirements of the solicitation and should have been removed from the
competitive range after the 1st BAFO.” (AR at Ex. 2.) Evidently, the evaluators themselves were unclear
as to which requirements were mandatory under the RFP.

        Additionally, OCP’s Cost/Price Analyst conducted a review of the 2nd BAFO responses and
provided findings to the CO. (AR at Ex. 2.) Synergistic’s 2nd BAFO proposed a base year cost of
$225,017.31 with the cost for option years 1 through 3 at $225,019.88 each. (See AR at Ex. 2.)
Remarkably, the cost of providing the very same services for option year 4 was offered at $8,118.25, a
mere 3.61% of the cost of the other years. (See AR at Ex. 2.) While some of the other offerors also
reduced their prices for option year 4, those that did, reduced the cost for option year 4 by an average of
45%. (See AR at Ex. 2.) The analysis of Synergistic’s proposal concluded that its proposed budget
included 72.34% overhead on labor plus fringe benefits and that the rates could not be supported. (Resp.
to Bd. Order at Ex. H, at 4.)

The Board’s Record

        The record consists of the RFP, Procurement Chronology, Determination and Findings (“D&F”)
Reports, and other documents submitted by the protesters and the District, including those in the Agency
Report or in response to a request from this Board. Most notably, the District provided a Bid Tabulation
Spreadsheet for every offeror that shows each evaluation factor under each evaluation criterion. For each
evaluation factor, the District provided the individual score of each panelist along with the consensus
score of the Panel for each factor and for each offeror. The District also provided the CO’s scores and the
scores following the 1st BAFO. (See AR at Ex. 3.)

         With respect to the individual evaluation sheets of offeror proposals (see Resp. to Bd. Order at
Ex. C), there are significant gaps in the record and unexplained inconsistencies. For example,

                (1) some evaluations are incomplete, with missing pages; (see id.)
                (2) there are no evaluation sheets provided for contractors I, K and P;
                    (see id.)
                (3) the District provided only one evaluation sheet per bidder (see id.)
                    yet the Bid Tabulation Sheets show that four individual evaluations
                    were completed for each bid (three panelist evaluations and one CO
                    evaluation) (see AR at Ex. 3);
                (4) all of the evaluation sheets reflect only the CO’s scores; (compare
                    Resp. to Bd. Order at Ex. C, with AR at Ex. 3)

                                                    -7-
                                                                                      Urban Alliance Foundation, et al.
                                                                                              P-0886, P-0887, P-0890
                                                                                                      P-0891, P-0892

                    (5) there is no record of the Panel’s individual evaluation sheets (with
                         the exception of the evaluation for Offeror X) 3;
                    (6) the District provided two different evaluation sheets for Offeror S
                         and, even though both evaluation sheets were completed by the CO,
                         different scores appear on each sheet and only one evaluation sheet
                         matches the scores on the Bid Tabulation Sheet; (see Resp. to Bd. at
                         Ex. C; see also AR at Ex. 3)
                    (7) individual evaluation sheets are inconsistent with the Bid
                         Tabulation Sheet; (compare Resp. to Bd. Order at Ex. C, with AR at
                         Ex. 3)
                    (8) in seven instances the scores on the individual evaluation sheet do
                         not match scores on the Bid Tabulation Sheet; (compare Resp. to
                         Bd. Order at Ex. C, with AR at Ex. 3)
                    (9) in three instances the inconsistency is confined to a single
                         evaluation criterion or a few technical approach factors; (compare
                         Resp. to Bd. Order at Ex. C, with AR at Ex. 3)
                    (10) in one instance the CO’s comments in the spreadsheet are consistent
                         with the comments in the corresponding evaluation sheet; however,
                         none of the scores match those recorded on the evaluation sheet;
                         (compare Resp. to Bd. Order at Ex. C, with AR at Ex. 3)
                    (11) in five instances the Board was unable to locate any scores on the
                         Bid Tabulation Sheet that reflect those on the evaluation sheet;
                         (compare Resp. to Bd. Order at Ex. C, with AR at Ex. 3)
                    (12) the evaluation sheet for one Offeror is completely blank except for
                         the word “unresponsive” in the header; yet, for this particular
                         bidder, there are scores from every evaluator for each evaluation
                         factor; (compare Resp. to Bd. Order at Ex. C, with AR at Ex. 3) and
                    (13) lastly, the District has been unable to provide sufficient
                         contemporaneous documentation of the evaluation process. 4

The Protests

         On July 28, 2011, Urban Alliance received notice that it was not in the competitive range. (Urban
Alliance Protest 2, Aug. 10, 2011.) Urban Alliance filed its protest with this Board on August 10, 2011.
(Id.) It asserted three grounds for protest based on: (i) alleged irregularities that permeated the
procurement process from as early as September 2010 when an earlier solicitation was issued for the same
services; 5 (ii) the District’s cancellation and reissue of a nearly identical solicitation; and (iii) the



3
 The evaluation sheet provided for Offeror X corresponds to the set of scores assigned to Evaluator 3 on the Bid
Tabulation Sheet. (Compare Resp. to Bd. Order at Ex. C, with AR at Ex. 3.) However, the evaluation was
completed by Crystal Farmer-Linder, the Contracting Specialist. (See Resp. to Bd. Order at Ex. C.) It is unclear
whether Ms. Farmer-Linder was part of the Panel since at times her scores appear in the CO column on the Bid
Tabulation Sheets.
4
    The D&F Report was completed more than a month after the award to Synergistic. (See AR at Ex. 2.)
5
 On December 16, 2010, Urban Alliance was awarded a contract for similar services under the earlier solicitation;
however, the award was later cancelled on January 14, 2011. (Urban Alliance Protest 3-4.) Protesters have alleged
that unexplained irregularities started in the earlier procurement and continued through to the present solicitation.
(See, e.g., Urban Alliance Resp. to Mot. to Dismiss 2, Oct. 4, 2011.)

                                                         -8-
                                                                                     Urban Alliance Foundation, et al.
                                                                                             P-0886, P-0887, P-0890
                                                                                                     P-0891, P-0892

District’s failure to evaluate the proposals in accordance with the law and the terms of the solicitation. (Id.
at 3-8.)

        On August 12, 2011, the Chief Procurement Officer signed a Determination and Finding to
Proceed with Award While Protest is Pending. 6 (Letter to Board of Contract Appeals from Howard
Schwartz, Senior Assistant Attorney General Attach. 1, Aug. 15, 2011.) The District awarded the
contract to Synergistic on August 12, 2011. (AR at Ex. 5.)

          On August 17, 2011, VOOS and PEECC received notice of award. (VOOS Protest 1, Aug 19,
2011; PEECC Protest 1, Aug. 24, 2011.) VOOS filed its protest on August 19, 2011, and asserted the
same three grounds for protest as Urban Alliance. 7 (VOOS Protest 3-7.) On August 24, 2011, PEECC
filed its protest. PEECC asserted fifteen different bases for protest which fall into two general categories:
(i) that incomprehensible irregularities occurred during a five month procurement process; and (ii) that the
District failed to comply with the legal conditions and terms of solicitation. (PEECC Protest 2-5.)

         On August 18, 2011, JAG and HDA received notice of award. (JAG Protest 2, Sept. 1, 2011;
HDA Protest 2, Aug. 26, 2011.) HDA filed its protest with this Board on August 24, 2011, and alleged
two bases for protest: (i) that unexplained irregularities permeated the procurement; and (ii) that the
District failed to evaluate the proposals in accordance with the law and the terms of the solicitation. (HDA
Protest 4-7.) On September 1, 2011, JAG filed the last of these related protests and asserted the same
protest grounds as Urban Alliance. (JAG Protest 3-9.)

        On September 2, 2011, the Board consolidated the above-referenced protests. On September 23,
2011, the District filed its Motion to Dismiss with the Board.

                                                 DISCUSSION

I. BOARD JURISDICTION

       We exercise jurisdiction over this protest and its underlying allegations pursuant to D.C. Code §
2-360.03(a)(1) (2011).

        A. Timeliness

         The District has argued that the protests are untimely because the protesters were aware of
alleged procurement irregularities that were said to have occurred prior to June 8, 2011, the deadline for
receipt of proposals. Under CAB Rule 302.2(a), “[a] protest based upon alleged improprieties in a
solicitation which are apparent prior to bid opening or the time set for receipt of initial proposals shall be
filed with the Board prior to bid opening or the time set for receipt of initial proposals.” These
irregularities, as alleged, generally relate to the cancellation of the earlier solicitation, the cancellation and
reissue of the RFP, numerous extensions of the due date, and extending the final deadline for receipt of

6
  On September 6, 2011, Urban Alliance filed a motion challenging the D&F and the Board then requested that the
parties file briefs on its authority to decide such challenges. The District and Urban Alliance each filed briefs
affirming the Board’s authority to rule on D&Fs following the Procurement Practices Reform Act of 2010. (See
District of Columbia Br. to the Contract Appeals Bd. 1-3, Sept. 19, 2011; Urban Alliance Br. on the Authority of the
Contract Appeals Board to Rule on a Challenge to an Agency’s DNF 1-2, Sept. 12, 2011.) The present Order renders
moot the challenge to the August 12th D&F.
7
  On December 16, 2010, VOOS was awarded a contract for similar services under the earlier solicitation. The
award was later cancelled on January 14, 2011. (VOOS Protest ¶ 3.)

                                                        -9-
                                                                                 Urban Alliance Foundation, et al.
                                                                                         P-0886, P-0887, P-0890
                                                                                                 P-0891, P-0892

proposals after some offerors had already submitted their proposals. Since these alleged improprieties, in
particular, were all known to the protesters prior to June 8th, the protest grounds related to these
irregularities are, in fact, untimely.

          However, in addition, each of the protesters alleged that the District failed to evaluate the
proposals in accordance with the law and the terms of the solicitation. Although the District has argued
that the protesters have failed to meet the requirement of CAB Rule 301.1(c) which requires the protests
to include a clear and concise statement of the legal and factual grounds of the protest, (Mot. to Dismiss
9) this Board’s precedent has been to read Rule 301.1(c) very narrowly. We have held that “[w]here the
District believes that a protest ground fails to state a violation of procurement law or regulation or is
unsupported by the facts, the matter should be addressed through the Agency Report on the merits in the
first instance and the absence of detailed facts concerning an alleged procurement deficiency in the initial
protest filing does not necessarily dictate dismissal.” CUP Temporaries, Inc., CAB No. P-0474, 44 D.C.
Reg. 6841, 6844 (July 3, 1997). Thus, even where a protester’s allegations are mainly conclusory or
barely supported by fact, where the applicable law and regulations at issue are made reasonably clear, this
Board must address the allegations on the merits. Unfoldment, Inc., CAB No. P-0435, 44 D.C. Reg. 6377,
6381 (Sept. 12, 1995).

         In this instance, the law and regulations at issue are reasonably clear due to the protesters’
allegations of improper evaluation procedures. And, by filing protests within (10) business days of their
knowledge of the award to Synergistic, the protests, as they relate to the evaluation process, were timely.
Under CAB Rule 302.2 (b), protests shall be filed with the Board not later than (10) business days after
the basis of the protest is known or should have been known. In Sigal Construction, CAB Nos. P-0690,
P-0693, P-0694, 52 D.C. Reg. 4243, 4254 (Nov. 24, 2004), the Board clarified that the (10) day period
begins when the offeror knows the basis of the protest and the party has become aggrieved due to an
official action adverse to that party. The Board also held that notice of award is considered an adverse
official action. Id.

         For Urban Alliance, the adverse official action occurred on July 28, 2011, when it received notice
that it was not in the competitive range. (See Urban Alliance Protest 2.) It filed its protest with this
Board on August 10, 2011, well within (10) business days of the District’s adverse official action. With
respect to the other protesters, notice of adverse official action occurred on either August 17th or 18th
when they received notice of the award to Synergistic. (See, e.g., VOOS Protest 1.) Each offeror had
until August 31 or September 1 respectively to file a protest with this Board. JAG filed the last of these
consolidated protests on September 1, 2011. (JAG Protest.) Accordingly, all protests were timely filed
with this Board.

        B. Standing

         The District has argued that the protesters are without standing since they are not next in line and
therefore do not have a reasonable chance of award. (Mot. to Dismiss 7.) This Board has long held that
in order to have standing a bidder must be next in line for award in order to show that it has suffered, or
will suffer, direct economic injury as a result of the adverse agency action. Scientific Games, Inc., CAB
No. P-0294, 41 D.C. Reg. 3666, 3670 (Sept. 24, 1993). However, the Board has also held that protesters
have standing when challenging the integrity of the manner in which offeror proposals are scored even if
they are not next in line for award. In CUP Temporaries, Inc., CAB No. P-0474, 44 D.C. Reg. 6841 (July
3, 1997), the Board held that “[b]ased on the final rankings of the evaluators, it is clear that the Protester
is ranked third among the offerors on the RFP. Nevertheless, since the Protester challenges the integrity
of the manner in which the agency officials scored all the offerors the Protester meets the standing
requirements.”


                                                    -10-
                                                                                       Urban Alliance Foundation, et al.
                                                                                               P-0886, P-0887, P-0890
                                                                                                       P-0891, P-0892



        In this case, the protesters have alleged irregularities in the procurement process and we have
specifically noted herein a number of evaluation irregularities in the record.8 Under the circumstances,
the evaluation rankings are not dispositive and the protesters meet the CUP standard for standing.

II. EVALUATION PROCESS

         The Board’s standard of review for proposal evaluations and the related selection decision is
whether the District’s actions were reasonable, in accord with the evaluation and selection criteria
identified in the solicitation and whether there were violations of procurement laws or regulations. See,
Trifax Corp., CAB No. P-0539, 45 D.C. Reg. 8842, 8847 (Sept. 25, 1998); see also Health Right, Inc.,
D.C. Health Coop., Inc., & The George Washington Univ., CAB Nos. P-0507, P-0510, P-0511, 45 D.C.
Reg. 8612, 8630 (Oct. 15, 1997). In applying this standard of review to this protest, we find that the
violations of procurement law are sufficiently material such that the selection decision cannot be
supported based on the evidence submitted for review. Following are four general areas where the Board
finds the evaluation process inconsistent in terms of the solicitation and in violation of procurement law:
(A) failure to disclose mandatory minimum requirements, (B) failure to adequately document, (C) failure
to evaluate reasonably, and (D) failure to conduct a blind evaluation.

         A. Failure to Disclose Mandatory Minimum Requirements

        Urban Alliance alleges that the District’s decision to exclude it from the competitive range was
based on an improper application of an undisclosed mandatory minimum requirement. 9 (Urban
Alliance’s Resp. to District’s Mot. to Dismiss 5, Oct. 4, 2011.) Specifically, Urban Alliance points to
Section C.5.2.1 as the basis for its exclusion from the competitive range. (Urban Alliance’s Comments on
the AR 4, Oct. 12, 2011.) But it argues that the language of C.5.2.1 is not sufficiently distinct from other
requirements in the solicitation to set it apart as a mandatory minimum requirement. (Id. at 4-5.)

         We agree. This Board finds that in establishing the competitive range, the District arbitrarily
identified mandatory minimum requirements that were used to disqualify Urban Alliance and other
bidders even though such mandatory requirements were never communicated to the offerors either in the
language of the solicitation or in the subsequent discussions.

         A mandatory minimum requirement is “pass/fail in nature and may lead to the outright rejection
of a proposal that falls short of what [it] specif[ies].” Banknote Corp. of Am., Inc. v. United States, 56
Fed. Cl. 377, 382 (2003). Accordingly, procurement practice dictates that “[m]andatory minimum
requirements must be clearly identified as such within the solicitation so as to ‘put the offerors on notice’
of the serious consequences of failing to meet the requirement.” Id. Additionally, if one factor in an
evaluation is predominantly more important than another, this information should be disclosed to
offerors. Isratex, Inc. v. United States, 25 Cl. Ct. 223, 230 (1992). A procuring agency should provide
“fullest possible disclosure” of the relative importance of all evaluation factors. Id.

8
  See our discussion of evaluation irregularities supra pp 7-8.
9
  Urban Alliance’s technical proposal stated that its High School Internship Program targets youths ages 16-19.
(Urban Alliance Resp. to District’s Mot. to Dismiss Ex. A-1, at Part I.B.) The District may have been unclear
whether Urban Alliance intended to provide services to all of the ages 14-21 youth population; however, this Board
has held that “if there is a close question of acceptability or if the noted deficiency is susceptible to correction
through relatively limited discussion, then the inclusion of the proposal in the competitive range is in order.” Educ.
In-roads, a div. of Sylvan Learning Sys., Inc., CAB No. P-0552, 46 D.C. Reg. 8519, 8525 (October 27, 1998).


                                                        -11-
                                                                                 Urban Alliance Foundation, et al.
                                                                                         P-0886, P-0887, P-0890
                                                                                                 P-0891, P-0892

        In the Agency Report, the Contract Specialist states that “[t]he competitive range included those
offerors whose proposals met the minimum requirements of the solicitation as set forth in the following
Sections:” B.3.1, B.3.2, B.3.3, C.5.2, and C.5.2.1. (AR at Ex. 2.) In its response to the Board’s October
25th request for supplemental information, the District put forth not only those previously-identified
sections, but in addition, Sections C.1, C.5.4.2 and C.5.12.9 were newly-identified as mandatory
minimum requirements of the solicitation.10 (See Resp, to Bd. Order ¶ A.)

         A review of Section B.3.2 shows that it clearly and plainly states that in order to be awarded a
contract, the offeror must fulfill that section’s proposal requirement.

                In order for an Offeror to be awarded a contract, the Offeror must serve
                the entire SDA and the Offeror must operate programming at a location
                that is within the SDA.

                (AR at Ex. 1, § B.3.2)

        Section C.5.2.1, which has also been identified by the District as a mandatory minimum
requirement, states:

                The Offeror shall provide services to youth who are most likely to
                become disconnected. This represents youth who are low-income
                individuals, between the ages of 14 and 21, and who are currently in
                school.

                (AR at Ex. 1, § C.5.2.1)

However, Section C.5.2.1 is not distinguishable as creating a mandatory minimum requirement when
compared to other sections in the solicitation that are similarly phrased with the use of the word “shall”
but not considered by the District to create a mandatory requirement. For example, the District does not
consider Section C.5.4.1 to be a mandatory minimum requirement of the solicitation. This section states:

                The Offeror shall conduct preliminary activities to market the year-round
                program to eligible youth in the community . . .

                (AR at Ex. 1.)

Similarly, Section C.5.5.1 has not been identified as a mandatory minimum requirement yet it states:

                The Offeror shall engage in activities and services related to three
                components:
                1. Education;
                2. Work Readiness and Experience; and,
                3. Placement and Transition Support.”

                (AR at Ex. 1.)



10
  The Procurement Chronology does not include these three sections as a basis for establishing the competitive
range or as minimum requirements of the solicitation.

                                                    -12-
                                                                                     Urban Alliance Foundation, et al.
                                                                                             P-0886, P-0887, P-0890
                                                                                                     P-0891, P-0892

        Urban Alliance was removed from the competitive range prior to any BAFOs for failure to meet
the mandatory minimum requirement in the above-referenced Section C.5.2.1. (AR at Ex. 2.) However,
Sections C.5.4.1 and C.5.5.1 are similarly phrased and those sections are not considered by the District to
be mandatory minimum requirements. We find that Section C.5.2.1 was not worded so as to put offerors
on notice of the importance of that section as a mandatory minimum requirement.

         After the 2nd BAFO, protesters JAG and PEECC were removed from the competitive range for
failing to meet the requirement of Section B.3.1 which states:

                   For the purpose of this RFP and the ensuing contracts the District will be
                   divided into two Service Delivery Areas (SDAs);

                   SDA District 1: Wards 1, 2, 3, and 4.
                   SDA District 2: Wards 5, 6, 7, and 8.

                   It is the intent of the District to award at least one contract for each of the
                   SDAs. The District will award additional contracts based upon program
                   needs and availability of funds.

                   (AR at Ex. 2.)

It remains unclear which words within this section provide notice of a requirement, let alone a mandatory
minimum requirement.

         The evaluators themselves appeared to not have a clear understanding of the mandatory
requirements that would result in offerors being removed from the competitive range. Two bidders11
failed to meet the mandatory minimum requirement of Section C.5.2.1 yet, inexplicably, were asked to
submit BAFOs for both the first and second rounds of discussion. (See AR at Ex. 2.) Urban Alliance was
disqualified prior to the 1st BAFO for failure to satisfy the very same requirement. Therefore some
offerors were not similarly excluded from the competitive range. (See AR at Ex. 2.) The unequal
treatment of the offeror proposals seriously violated the District’s procurement law and undermined the
integrity of the process. See D.C. Code § 2-351.01(b)(4) (2010) (stating that a purpose of the
Procurement Practices Reform Act of 2010 is to “ensure fair and equitable treatment of all persons who
deal with the procurement system of the District government”); see also Rockwell Elec. Commerce Corp.,
B-286201 et al, 2001 CPD ¶ 65 (Comp. Gen. Dec. 14, 2000) (“It is . . . fundamental that the contracting
agency . . . treat all offerors equally, which includes . . . not disparately evaluating offerors with respect to
the same requirements.”).

         By way of explanation, the Contracting Specialist states that “[i]t was determined by the
evaluation panel and the Contracting Officer that proposals submitted by [the Marquita Anissa Vaughn
Foundation, the United Planning Organization, and Urban Alliance] would require substantial revisions in
order to be determined acceptable.” (AR at Ex. 2.) This argument lacks credibility. Urban Alliance and
the awardee, Synergistic, each received the same scores from the Panel. Ultimately, after reviewing the
2nd BAFOs, the Contracting Specialist determined that nine of seventeen bidders were mistakenly
identified as being within the competitive range even though they should have been excluded after the 1st
BAFO for failing to meet the mandatory minimum requirements. (See AR at Ex. 2.)



11
     Perry School Community Center and Priority Professional Development.

                                                        -13-
                                                                                 Urban Alliance Foundation, et al.
                                                                                         P-0886, P-0887, P-0890
                                                                                                 P-0891, P-0892

        This Board finds that the protesters were prejudiced by the District’s failure to follow proper
procedures in evaluating the proposals. Bidders should not have been excluded from the competitive
range for failing to meet mandatory minimum requirements absent clear notice that failure to address
those requirements would result in disqualification. With the exception of Section B.3.2, the language of
the mandatory minimum requirements, as identified by the District, is insufficient to provide appropriate
notice. Even more importantly, the District did not treat offerors equally in applying mandatory
minimum requirements, in clear violation of procurement law.

        B. Failure to Adequately Document

         The District submitted the Agency Report to the Board on October 3, 2011. Upon its review, the
protesters filed a response to the Agency Report challenging OCP’s failure to adequately document its
source selection decision. (See, e.g., Urban Alliance’s Comments on the AR 8.) We agree that the
District has failed to offer sufficient documentation of its evaluation process. There is a severe lack of
contemporaneous documentation to explain or support an overall rational basis for the award decision as
well as OCP’s decision to exclude offerors from the competitive range.

         This Board has stated that source selection “decisions must be documented in sufficient detail to
show that they are not arbitrary.” Health Right, Inc., D.C. Health Coop., Inc., & The George Washington
Univ., CAB Nos. P-0507, P-0510, P-0511, 45 D.C. Reg. 8612, 8635 (Oct. 15, 1997). This in no way
means that an agency is required to “retain every document or worksheet generated during its evaluation
of proposals.” Id. at 8636. However, “[w]here an agency fails to document or retain evaluation materials,
it bears the risk that there is inadequate supporting rationale in the record for the source selection decision
and that we will not conclude that the agency had a reasonable basis for decision.” Id. quoting Sw Marine,
Inc., B-265865, 96-1 CPD ¶ 56 (Comp. Gen. Jan. 23, 1996)). Moreover, the District’s regulations require
certain documentation in the conduct of a procurement. Most pertinent to this protest, the regulations
require that where a Technical Evaluation Panel is formed to evaluate proposals, a technical evaluation
report shall be prepared by the technical official and shall contain the following:

                 (a) The basis for evaluation;
                 (b) An analysis of the technically acceptable and unacceptable proposals,
                 including an assessment of each offeror’s ability to accomplish the
                 technical requirements;
                 (c) A summary, matrix, or quantitative ranking of each technical
                 proposal in relation to the best rating possible; and
                 (d) A summary of findings.

                 D.C. Mun. Regs. tit. 27 § 1618.5 (2002)

         While the District was not required to keep copies of every piece of paper generated throughout
the evaluation process, the documents submitted to the Board in support of this award are exceedingly
inadequate. First, there is very little contemporaneous documentation as many items submitted to the
record were not created until more than a month after the award decision. (See, e.g., AR at Ex. 2.) Cf.
Trifax Corp., CAB No. P-0539, 45 D.C. Reg. 8842, 8847 (Sept. 25, 1998) (“We accord greater weight to
contemporaneous evaluation and source selection material than to arguments and documentation prepared
in response to protest contentions.”). The only truly contemporaneous documentation provided by the
District are the individual evaluation sheets; a set of five page documents completed by a single evaluator
for a particular contractor including scores for each solicitation factor and comments of the particular
evaluator. (See Resp. to Bd. Order at Ex. C.) Where provided, the documentation submitted by the
District is incomplete. There are no evaluation sheets for contractors I, K, and P, and pages are missing

                                                     -14-
                                                                                Urban Alliance Foundation, et al.
                                                                                        P-0886, P-0887, P-0890
                                                                                                P-0891, P-0892

from some evaluations. (See id.) While three offerors are completely absent from the record, the District,
with one exception, provided only one evaluation sheet for each of the remaining twenty offerors. (See
id.) It is important to note that a total of four evaluation sheets should have been provided for each
individual offeror as the Bid Tabulation Spreadsheet indicates that four individual evaluations were
conducted for each of the twenty-three offerors, one by the CO and one by each member of the Panel.
(See AR at Ex. 3.) The one exception is Offeror S. The District provided two evaluation sheets for
Offeror S. Both were completed by the CO but contain different sets of scores and one set of those scores
appear on the Bid Tabulation Sheet. Most troubling, the evaluation sheets provided reflect only the CO’s
scores. (Compare Resp. to Bd. Order at Ex. C, with AR at Ex. 3.) There is no record of the Panel’s
evaluation sheets.

         Second, the few contemporaneous documents that the District provided are incongruous.
Specifically, the evaluation sheets at times are inconsistent with the Bid Tabulation Sheet. In seven
instances the evaluation sheets do not concur with the set of scores on the Bid Tabulation Sheet.
(Compare AR at Ex. 3, with Resp. to Bd. Order at Ex. C.) Some of these incongruities are minor, though
still concerning. For example, there is a sub-factor score for Offeror E that does not match the score
awarded on the individual evaluation sheet; and similarly, Offeror M’s Technical Bonus points do not
match. (Compare Resp. to Bd. Order at Ex. C, with AR at Ex. 3.) Some inconsistencies, on the other
hand, are truly problematic. In five instances entire sets of scores on the individual evaluation sheets do
not match any scores on the Bid Tabulation Sheet. (Compare Resp. to Bd. Order at Ex. C, with AR at Ex.
3 (Offerors A, H, J, U, & V).) The materials provided do not support a conclusion that a rational and
lawful evaluation process occurred.

        Whereas this Board will not substitute its judgment for that of the CO with respect to the
evaluation findings, it cannot blindly accept evaluation findings and a resulting award decision that are
not reasonably supported by the factual record. Although a Panel is not required to be used, when a Panel
is convened as in this case, under D.C. Mun. Regs. tit. 27, § 1618.5, a technical evaluation report must be
completed consisting of the basis for the evaluation, an analysis of the proposals, a quantitative ranking of
each technical proposal, and a summary of findings. The District failed to provide a technical evaluation
report as required. Given the inadequacy of the record, the District did not provide sufficient
documentation to support a finding that the award had a rational basis. Further, in light of the
inconsistency of the information provided, the Board finds that there is insufficient evidence to support
the award decision.

        C. Failure to Evaluate Reasonably

         The protesters have alleged that the District failed to evaluate the proposals reasonably and in
accordance with the terms of the solicitation. (See, e.g., Urban Alliance Protest 8.) They contend that the
protest should be sustained because the award decision was arbitrary. (See, e.g., id.) The District has
maintained that it scored the proposals in strict compliance with the evaluation criteria set forth in the
RFP. (Mot. to Dismiss 10-11.) Upon a review of the record, the Board finds that the evaluation process
violated procurement law as there is no consistent, discernable standard or approach. The Board
concludes that the process was arbitrary, unreasonable and not in accordance with the terms of the
solicitation or the relevant procurement statutes and regulations.

       “In determining the propriety of an evaluation decision, we examine the record to determine
whether the judgment was reasonable and in accord with the evaluation criteria listed in the solicitation
and whether there were any violations of procurement laws or regulations.” Health Right, Inc., D.C.
Health Coop., Inc., & The George Washington Univ., CAB Nos. P-0507, P-0510, P-0511, 45 D.C. Reg. at
8635. In reviewing an evaluation decision, the Board must consider the totality of the record to determine

                                                    -15-
                                                                                Urban Alliance Foundation, et al.
                                                                                        P-0886, P-0887, P-0890
                                                                                                P-0891, P-0892

if the evaluations are reasonable and “bear a rational relationship to the announced criteria upon which
competing offerors are to be selected.” Id.

        The terms of the solicitation clearly stated that a technical review team would be used to evaluate
each responsive proposal. (AR at Ex. 1, § M.3.6.2.) According to the Procurement Chronology, the Panel
consisted entirely of DOES staff. (See AR at Ex. 2.) The panelists and the CO each independently
conducted a simultaneous review of the proposals in accordance with the evaluation criteria set forth in
Section M of the RFP. (AR at Ex. 2.) The CO then reviewed the 1st BAFOs and the 2nd BAFOs without
assistance of the Panel. (See AR at Ex. 2.)

        A review of the Bid Tabulation Sheet shows that the individual scores of panelists, prior to the
consensus panel discussion, were often within a comparable range of each other. (See AR at Ex. 3.) For
example, in the case of Synergistic, the panelists’ individual scores are all within a one point range of
each other. (See AR at Ex. 3, at 51-53.) After independent review, the Panel met to assign a consensus
score to each offeror’s bid. (AR at Ex. 2.) The following is a brief summary of the Panel’s findings:

        Proposals receiving scores >Synergistic’s score                             12
        Proposals receiving scores = Synergistic (7) + Synergistic’sscore (1)        8
        Proposals receiving scores <Synergistic’s score                              3
        Total Offerors                                                              23

        The CO’s evaluation of the same proposals according to the same evaluation criteria yielded
markedly different results. The CO awarded Synergistic’s proposal the highest score of all proposals, in
part by awarding 29.4 more points to Synergistic’s proposal than did the Panel. (See AR at Ex. 3, at 53.)
The CO’s scoring also deviated significantly from the Panel’s with respect to Urban Alliance. The Panel
awarded Urban Alliance’s proposal the same score as it awarded Synergistic’s. (See AR at Ex. 3.) By
contrast, the CO assigned 23.8 points less to Urban Alliance. (See AR at Ex. 3, at 57.) The result is that
the two proposals, when reviewed by the three-member Panel, were found to be generally of a similar
strength. Following the CO’s review, the two proposals were separated by more than 50 points on a 122
point scale. (See generally AR at Ex. 3). No explanation was provided for the scoring differential
between the CO and the Panel.

         Therefore, although the District asserts that the CO considered the Panel’s findings throughout,
there is no evidence to support this assertion. In fact, the record supports an opposite conclusion. In eight
out of seventeen instances the CO’s scores remained unchanged from his initial review. (See AR at Ex.
3.) And while the CO was authorized to exercise his own decision-making authority and disagree with
the Panel, the critical point is that the CO failed to document why he disagreed with the Panel. Under the
relevant case law, it is not the score per se that determines whether the opinions of lower level evaluators
were properly considered, but rather the CO’s judgment concerning the difference and the relative merits
of proposals. Health Right, Inc., D.C. Health Coop., Inc., & The George Washington Univ., CAB Nos. P-
0507, P-0510, P-0511, 45 D.C. Reg. at 8636. The two evaluations of the same proposal under the same
criteria diverge by more than 50 points out of a total 122 points. Given that significant disparity,
certainly, a comment in the Bid Tabulation Sheet was warranted to explain the CO’s decision to maintain
his initial scores. Without that information, the Board has no way of understanding the CO’s judgment
and, as a consequence, calls into question any claim that the CO properly considered the Panel’s findings.

         Moreover, although the CO may have found Synergistic’s pricing proposal reasonable, the Board
notes that the record does not support that same conclusion specifically because the CO failed to account
for Synergistic’s questionable pricing for option year 4. Under the District’s procurement regulations, it
is the responsibility of the contracting officer to “evaluate the cost estimate or price [of a proposal], not

                                                    -16-
                                                                                    Urban Alliance Foundation, et al.
                                                                                            P-0886, P-0887, P-0890
                                                                                                    P-0891, P-0892

only to determine whether it is reasonable, but also to determine the offeror’s understanding of the work
and ability to perform the contract.” D.C. Mun. Regs. tit. 27, § 1618.2 (2002). Synergistic proposed a
base year cost of $225,017.31 with the cost for option years 1 through 3 at $225,019.88 each. (See AR at
Ex. 2.) The cost for option year 4, however, is priced at $8,118.25, (see AR at Ex. 2) which represents a
mere 3.61% of the cost of services for the other years. This calls into question whether Synergistic would
be able to provide the required services during option year 4 at that stated price. The CO’s analysis
makes no note of that fact despite this significant variance. Some other offerors also reduced their pricing
for option year 4; however, those that did, reduced the price for option year 4 by an average of 45%. (See
AR at Ex. 2.) Besides, in the analysis, the Contract Specialist reviewed Synergistic’s pricing and stated
that Synergistic’s proposed budget included 72.34% overhead on labor plus fringe benefits and that the
rates could not be supported. (See Resp. to Bd. Order at Ex. H.) There is no evidence that the CO
properly accounted for this incongruity when scoring pricing under the solicitation.

        Hence, we find that the CO failed in his duty to properly evaluate the proposals in two significant
ways. First, as previously discussed, the CO did not properly consider the evaluations and comments
prepared by the Panel as there is no documentation to support the – oftentimes significant – deviation
from the Panel’s scores. Second, the CO appears to have at times merely adopted evaluation scores and
comments written by other individuals (and it is unclear whether such persons are panelists or OCP or
DOES employees). 12

         The District’s procurement regulations provide that a contracting officer may be assisted by
others in evaluating proposals. However, where a contracting officer is in fact assisted, he must not
relinquish his decision-making authority even though it is incumbent upon him to consider the opinions of
those chosen to assist him. In the past this Board has held that “technical point scores and descriptive
ratings of lower level evaluators must be considered by the Contracting Officer in making the final
selection even though he is not bound by those evaluations or recommendations.” Health Right, Inc.,
D.C. Health Coop., Inc., & The George Washington Univ., CAB Nos. P-0507, P-0510, P-0511, 45 D.C.
Reg. at 8636. At the same time, the procurement regulations clearly state that it is the responsibility of
the contracting officer to “evaluate each proposal in accordance with the evaluation criteria in the
solicitation.” D.C. Mun. Regs. tit 27, § 1618.1 (2002). Consequently, this Board has noted that
“[a]lthough the contracting officer may be assisted in the evaluation by others, . . . the contracting officer
always remains responsible for the evaluation of proposals.” Health Right, Inc., D.C. Health Coop., Inc.,
& The George Washington Univ., CAB Nos. P-0507, P-0510, P-0511, 45 D.C, Reg. at 8636. Ultimately,
it is inappropriate for the contracting officer to merely “adopt” evaluation and scoring conducted by
individuals other than himself. See id. at 8637.

        In this case, the CO appears to have been assisted by individuals other than Panel members. In
nine instances, three other individuals scored proposals and the scores provided appear as the CO’s scores
on the Bid Tabulation Sheet. 13 The CO personally completed only eight evaluation sheets. (See Resp. to
Bd. Order at Ex. C.) All the evaluation sheets provided, whether completed by the CO or one of the three
other individuals, reflect the scores of the CO on the Bid Tabulation Sheet. (Compare Resp. to Bd. Order
at Ex. C, with AR at Ex. 3.) It is the CO’s responsibility to review proposals and where scores awarded
by individuals other than the CO are presented as the CO’s scores, it appears that the CO abdicated his

12
   Although Stuart Keeler has been identified as the Contracting Officer (AR at Ex. 1), the names of Eloine Evans-
McNeill, John Deer, and Crystal Farmer-Linder all appear along with the CO on the individual tabulation sheets.
(See Resp. to Bd. Order at Ex. C.)
13
   Eloine Evans-McNeill, John Deer, and Crystal Farmer-Linder completed 12 of the 20 evaluation sheets. (See
Resp. to Bd. Order at Ex. C.)


                                                      -17-
                                                                                 Urban Alliance Foundation, et al.
                                                                                         P-0886, P-0887, P-0890
                                                                                                 P-0891, P-0892

responsibility. There is no explanation in the record for this practice, which as it stands, does not
constitute a valid exercise of contracting officer judgment.

         The Board finds that the CO acted in an arbitrary and unreasonable manner in failing to evaluate
offeror proposals in accordance with the law and the terms of the solicitation. He failed to consider the
findings of the Panel as well as failed to conduct a personal evaluation of all proposals. Given the totality
of the record, we cannot conclude that the evaluation process was reasonable or rationally related to the
criteria set forth in the RFP.

        D. Failure to Conduct a Blind Evaluation

        The District has indicated that the CO’s evaluation of the proposals was not blind, that is, at the
time of his review, the offeror proposals were not anonymous. (AR at Ex. 2.) However, the CO’s failure
to conduct a blind evaluation violated the express terms of the solicitation. In protests of solicitations and
awards, the Board conducts a de novo review to determine whether the solicitation or award was in
accord with the applicable law, regulations and terms and conditions of the solicitation. Recycling
Solutions, Inc., CAB No. P-0377, 42 D.C. Reg. 4550, 4578 (April 15, 1994). Under CAB Rule 314.1, in
sustaining a protest, the Board determines whether the solicitation, proposed award, or award complies
with the applicable law, regulations, or terms and conditions of the solicitation.

        While not addressed specifically in the RFP, in response to questions submitted by potential
offerors, the District stated that “[t]he offeror’s proposal should be submitted with the offeror’s identity.
OCP will redact the offeror’s identity from the submitted proposals to ensure a ‘blind’ evaluation
process.” (AR at Ex. 1, Q.30.) The question and the District’s response were incorporated into the
revised RFP and became a term of the solicitation. (See id.) Despite affirming that the proposals would
be evaluated in redacted form to ensure anonymity, the CO performed the evaluations with full
knowledge of each offeror’s identity. (AR at Ex. 2.) In fact, the Board has reviewed twenty-one
evaluation sheets and all but seven individual evaluation sheets clearly show the name of the offeror. (See
Resp. to Bd. Order at Ex. C.)

         There is nothing in the solicitation or in procurement practice to suggest that a contracting
officer’s review of proposals should not be subject to the very terms of the solicitation whether such terms
are contained in the RFP or incorporated in the form of the District’s responses to questions submitted by
potential offerors. The CO’s review was not blind yet offerors were never provided notice of the change
in review process. And while this violation, by itself, would not necessarily void the award decision, in
this case, the violation further undermines the integrity of the procurement. A contracting officer’s
review is at the heart of any evaluation process and yet the District failed to follow its own solicitation
guidelines in clear violation of procurement law.

Conclusion

         Because the proposal evaluations were unsupported to a substantial degree, the award to
Synergistic was unreasonable. The Board hereby directs the District to terminate the contract awarded
under this RFP effective no later than the close of the current school year in June 2012. To the extent that
these services are required by the District for the summer school session of 2012 and beyond, the District
shall issue a request to the twenty-three offerors for revised technical and cost proposals for the remainder
of the base year and the option years. The District shall evaluate the revised proposals in accordance with
the law and the terms of the RFP. These consolidated protests are sustained.



                                                    -18-
                                                                               Urban Alliance Foundation, et al.
                                                                                       P-0886, P-0887, P-0890
                                                                                               P-0891, P-0892

SO ORDERED.

DATED: February 15, 2012                                  /s/ Maxine E. McBean
                                                          MAXINE E. MCBEAN
                                                          Administrative Judge


CONCURRING:

/s/ Monica C. Parchment
MONICA C. PARCHMENT
Administrative Judge



LOUD, Chief Administrative Judge, concurring.

         I concur with my colleagues that the consolidated protests herein should be sustained. The
District’s award decision to Synergistic followed an unreasonable and arbitrary evaluation process that
included, but was not limited to, the removal of Urban Alliance from the competitive range for
deficiencies (i.e., failure to meet the requirements of Section C.5.2.1) shared by two other bidders who
were asked to submit BAFOs for the first and second rounds. When coupled with the numerous
additional inconsistencies in the record (missing individual evaluation sheets, separate CO evaluation
sheets for the same bidder with different scores on each, an evaluation sheet for one offeror containing the
word “unresponsive” as to which every evaluator provided a score for each evaluation factor, etc.), the
clear picture that emerges is of an evaluation process that failed to follow the solicitation terms and
provisions of law.

        There should now be a growing sense of alarm among the procurement and program
professionals charged with implementing this aspect of the District of Columbia Youth Employment
Services Initiative Amendment Act of 2005 and the Workforce Investment Act of (WIA) of 1998
(DCYES and WIA). Our record shows that there have now been three consecutive solicitations for in-
school youth services that have not been executed properly, as shown either by delayed solicitations,
agency cancelled solicitations, or as here through the Board’s cancellation of an award.

          The trail of failed solicitations date back to at least Appeal of Friends of Carter Barron
Foundation Of The Performing Arts, CAB No. D-1421 (unpublished) (Nov. 15, 2011), wherein the Board
first learned of the December 16, 2011, award for in-school youth services in Contract No. DCCF-2011-
R-1000. Appeal of Friends of Carter Barron Foundation, at 4-5 (the Board dismissed the appeal and
protest on jurisdictional grounds). Through the consolidated cases herein, we now learn that the
December 16, 2010, awards were cancelled by the District on January 14, 2011. (Urban Protest 3-4;
VOOS Protest ¶3). Further, we learn that a second solicitation for these same youth in-school services
was issued on March 31, 2011, and cancelled on May 18, 2011. (Urban Protest, Ex. 2 Procurement
Chronology; see also Urban Protest at p¶¶8-9.) Finally, the Board has now cancelled the award made
under the third consecutive District attempt to effectuate the provisions of the DCYES and WIA.

         The services procured through this solicitation have the potential to positively impact life
outcomes for disconnected youth in Wards 5-8 of the District. I am hopeful that the alarm bells set off by
this string of troublesome solicitations will now translate into decisive action by the District’s
procurement professionals to lawfully conduct a solicitation that will enable program professionals to


                                                   -19-
                                                                            Urban Alliance Foundation, et al.
                                                                                    P-0886, P-0887, P-0890
                                                                                            P-0891, P-0892

commence the delivery of, and sustain the relationships with youth necessary to successfully effectuate
the purposes of the Acts noted above.

/s/ Marc D. Loud, Sr.
MARC D. LOUD, SR.
Chief Administrative Judge

Electronic Service:

James P. Gallatin, Jr. , Esq.
Lawrence S. Sher, Esq.
Gregory S. Jacobs, Esq.
Joelle E.K. Laszlo, Esq.
Melissa E. Beras, Esq.
Stacey C. Forbes, Esq.
Reed Smith LLP
1301 K Street, NW
East Tower – Suite 1100
Washington, DC 20005

Kenya Welch
Voices of Our Sisters, Inc.
611 Pennsylvania Avenue, SE
Washington, DC 20003

Sara Stone
Progressive Educational Experiences in Cooperative Cultures
2961A Hunter Mill Road, Suite 801
Oakton, VA 22124

Deborah Hayman
Higher Development Academy
702 15th Street, NE
Washington, DC 20006

Lawrence P. Block, Esq.
Dennis Lane, Esq.
Thorn Pozen, Esq.
Stinson Morrison Hecker, LLP
1150 18th Street, NW
Suite 800
Washington, DC 20036

Talia Cohen, Esq.
Janice Skipper, Esq.
Howard Schwartz, Esq.
Assistant Attorney General
Office of the Attorney General
441 4th Street, NW
Washington, DC 20001

                                                 -20-
