                 DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD


PROTEST OF:

ELITE PEOPLE PROTECTIVE SERVICES, INC.                      )
                                                            )        CAB No. P-0898
                                                            )
Solicitation No: DCFA-2011-B-3564


For the Protester: William Jackson, pro se. For the District of Columbia Government: Howard
Schwartz, Esq., Senior Assistant Attorney General, Office of the Attorney General.

Opinion by Administrative Judge Monica C. Parchment, with Chief Administrative Judge Marc
D. Loud, Sr. and Administrative Judge Maxine E. McBean, concurring.

                                                  OPINION
                                             Filing ID 41762609

        The protester, Elite People Protective Services, Inc., challenges the contracting officer’s
rejection of its bid as nonresponsive for failure to include a bid bond as required under the
solicitation. The protester alleges that the procurement was conducted unfairly and did not
provide offerors with sufficient time in advance to obtain the required bid bond and, further, that
the awardee, Securitas Security, was selected for award despite the fact that its bid also did not
include a bid bond.

       The Board, however, finds that the evaluation and award decision in this procurement
were proper and that the District reasonably determined that the protester’s bid was
nonresponsive and ineligible for award for failure to meet a material bid bond requirement.

                                             BACKGROUND

        The District’s Office of Contracting and Procurement issued Invitation for Bid No.
DCFA-2011-B-3564 (“IFB”) on September 2, 2011, which contemplated the award of a security
services contract in support of the District of Columbia Public Schools. As it relates to the crux
of the present protest allegations, the original terms of IFB Section H.16.1 required offerors to
provide a bid bond along with each offeror’s bid submission and maintain that bid bond until
notification of contract award. (Agency Report (“AR”) Ex. 1.) 1 Moreover, the original IFB
terms further mandated that, to the extent that the value of an offeror’s bid exceeded $100,000,
the offeror was required to submit a bid bond in an amount equivalent to 5% of the value of the
base year price of the contract. (Id.)



1
  IFB Section H.16.2 also required the awardee to obtain a performance bond in the amount of no less than 100% of
the contract amount immediately following contract award.
                                                         -2-              ELITE PEOPLE PROTECTIVE SERVICES, INC.
                                                                          CAB NO. P-0898

        Subsequently, by amendment dated September 16, 2011, the District modified the IFB to
explicitly delete the original bid bond requirement under Section H.16.1. (AR Ex. 2.) In its
place, the IFB was amended to include a direct mandate, under a newly revised Section H.16.1,
that offerors provide a bid bond with their bid submission in the amount of $100,000, which also
had to be maintained by the offeror until notification of the contract award. (Id.) 2

        The District received six bids from companies in response to the IFB including bids from
the protester, and the ultimate awardee, Securitas Security. Of these six bidders, three of these
companies, including Securitas Security, submitted the bid bond required by the IFB along with
their bid. Alternatively, in lieu of submitting the required bid bond, the protester’s bid was
accompanied, instead, by a letter to the District by which the protester explicitly admitted that it
was unable to obtain the required bid bond prior to the bid submission deadline. (AR Ex. 5.)
Further, the protester stated in this same correspondence that it had been assured by a third-party
bonding firm that it would be able to secure the required bid bond within 10 days of the District’s
expressed interest in its bid and, on this basis, Elite requested that the District waive the bid bond
requirement for its company (Id.)

       However, after receiving Elite’s bid, the District promptly notified the protester that its
bid would not be considered further for contract award based upon its failure to submit the
required bid bond along with its bid submission. (AR Ex. 6.) The present protest followed.

                                                DISCUSSION

      We exercise jurisdiction over this protest and its underlying allegations pursuant to D.C.
Code §2-360.03(a)(1).

        Elite’s grounds of protest in this matter primarily concern the rejection of its bid as
nonresponsive to the IFB requirements based upon its failure to include a bid bond along with its
bid as expressly required by the terms of the IFB. (Protest 1-2.) Specifically, the protester
alleges that the evaluation process was unfair because it did not allow sufficient time for the
bidders to secure the required bid bond to accompany their bids. 3 (Id.) The protester asserts
that because of this allegedly unreasonable bid bond requirement, only two of the six bidders
under the IFB were able to obtain, and submit the required bid bond. (Id.) In this regard, the
protester further alleges that even the awardee, Securitas Security, did not submit an actual bid
bond with its bid submission. (Id.)

        In response to these allegations, the District asserts that the protester’s bid was properly
rejected as nonresponsive because it did not meet the mandatory bid bond submission

2
  This September 16th amendment also modified, and replaced, the original IFB Section H.16.2 to require that the
awardee obtain a performance bond in the amount of $1 million upon entering into a contract with the District and
submit it to the contracting officer within 10 days of contract award.
3
   The protester also generally alleges the occurrence of numerous other irregularities in the evaluation process
including allegations that the District failed to answer bidder questions, provided inadequate notification to the
protester of the revised bid due date, and provided late notification of the September 16th amendment to the IFB
prior to bid opening. Given that these allegations do not appear to be the primary basis of the present protest, the
Board finds it unnecessary to address in further detail that these pre-award allegations would otherwise be untimely
filed in this matter.
                                                         -3-             ELITE PEOPLE PROTECTIVE SERVICES, INC.
                                                                         CAB NO. P-0898

requirement while the awardee, Securitas Security, did meet this requirement. (AR 2-3.)
According to the District, the letter that the protester submitted in lieu of the required bid bond
did not satisfy this bid bond requirement and further did not provide adequate grounds for
excusing the protester from meeting this bid bond requirement under District of Columbia law.
(Id. at 4-5.) Moreover, the District points out that the protester’s challenges to the IFB and
evaluation process as unfairly imposing a bid bond requirement are untimely as the protester was
required to protest these matters prior to bid opening. (Id. at 3-4.) 4

        The Board has repeatedly held that in order to be considered responsive to an IFB, a bid
must be an unequivocal offer to provide the exact items called for by the solicitation. Barcode
Technologies, Inc., CAB No. P-524, 45 D.C. Reg. 8723 (Feb. 11, 1998); S. Md. Restoration, Inc.,
CAB No. P-241, 39 D.C. Reg. 4268 (Aug. 7, 1991). Moreover, as it relates to the present matter,
a bid bond is a form of guarantee designed to protect the interests of the government in the event
of a contractor’s default and, thus, when required by a solicitation, is a material part of the bid
which must be furnished at the time of bid submission. See HR General Maintenance Corp.,
CAB No. P-545, 46 D.C. Reg. 8556 (October 9, 1998). Thus, in instances where a bidder has
failed to provide a bid bond required by the solicitation, the Board has held that such bids may
properly be rejected as nonresponsive to the solicitation requirements. Nation Capital Builders,
LLC, CAB No. P-0761, 57 D.C. Reg. 287 (November 20, 2007).

        In the present case, the protester does not dispute that the solicitation mandated that
offerors provide a bid bond to accompany their bid submission to the District. 5 In response to
this requirement, the contemporaneous evaluation record confirms that three of the six bidders in
this procurement, including the awardee, Securitas Security, in fact, submitted the proper
evidence of having obtained the required bid bond for the contract. (AR Ex. 4.) Therefore, as an
initial matter, the protester is incorrect in its assertion that the awardee, and a majority of the
offerors, did not, and could not, meet the bid bond requirement.

        The protester, on the other hand, did not provide a bid bond with its bid and expressly
acknowledged that it was missing this material requirement when it submitted its bid to the
District on September 27, 2011. (AR Ex. 5.) Moreover, the protester further confirmed its
awareness of having not met this material requirement by essentially requesting that the District
waive the bid bond requirement based upon the protester’s pending application for a bid bond.
(Id.) The IFB requirement, however, was obviously not met by the protester’s pending
application for a bid bond as the IFB explicitly required that evidence of an actual bid bond be
submitted with each offeror’s bid. (AR Exs. 1, 2, 3.) Additionally, the District further
reasonably determined that the protester did not meet the criteria for a waiver of the bid bond
requirement in this procurement under 27 DCMR 2702, and ultimately found the protester’s bid
to be nonresponsive based upon this material omission of the bid bond. (AR 5-6.)



4
  The Board also notes that the protester filed no Comments on the Agency Report to further support its protest
allegations, or to oppose the Agency Report allegations, as permitted by Board Rule 307. This rule further provides
that where the protester fails to file Comments on the Agency Report, facts in the Agency Report not otherwise
contradicted by the protest, or documents in the record, may be treated as conceded by the Board.
5
  27 DCMR 2700 sets forth guidelines as to the types of evidence of security that a contracting officer may accept
from bidders in satisfaction of a bid bond requirement, which were incorporated into the IFB. (AR Exs. 2, 3.)
                                                    -4-           ELITE PEOPLE PROTECTIVE SERVICES, INC.
                                                                  CAB NO. P-0898

        While the protester now complains that the IFB’s bid bond requirement was improper,
and could not reasonably be met by any offeror prior to the bid opening date, the protester never
formally challenged the propriety of this bid bond solicitation requirement prior to the rejection
of its bid for award. Indeed, protests challenging the propriety of a solicitation term that is
apparent prior to bid opening must be filed prior to bid opening. D.C. Code § 2-360.08(b)(1).
Consequently, the protester’s present challenge to the reasonableness of the IFB’s bid bond
requirement, which it clearly knew of prior to bid opening, is now untimely raised in this protest.

       For the reasons discussed herein, the Board finds that the protester’s bid was reasonably
deemed nonresponsive by the District, and properly rejected for award, for failure to meet the
IFB’s material bid bond requirement.

       The present protest is, therefore, denied.

       SO ORDERED.


DATED: January 9, 2012                                    /s/ Monica C. Parchment
                                                          MONICA C. PARCHMENT
                                                          Administrative Judge

CONCURRING:

/s/ Marc D. Loud, Sr.                                     /s/Maxine E. McBean
MARC D. LOUD, SR.                                         MAXINE E. MCBEAN
Chief Administrative Judge                                Administrative Judge



Electronic Service:

Mr. William Jackson
President and CEO
Elite People Protective Services, Inc.
5602 Baltimore National Pike #401
Catonsville, MD 21228

Howard Schwartz
Senior Assistant Attorney General
441 4th Street, N.W., Suite 700 S
Washington, D.C. 20001
