               DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD


PROTEST OF:

Kennedy Development, LLC                              )
                                                      )       CAB No. P-0850
Under RFP No: DCKT-2009-R-0120                        )

      For the Protester, Sandra Pone, CEO, Kennedy Development, LLC. For the District of
Columbia Government: Robert Schildkraut, Esq., Assistant Attorney General.

       Opinion by Administrative Judge Warren J. Nash, with Administrative Judge Jonathan D.
Zischkau, concurring

                                            OPINION
                                         Filing ID 32946228

        Kennedy Development, LLC, has protested the award of a contract issued for grounds
keeping and landscaping services to Lorenz, Inc., or any offeror other than Kennedy. Kennedy’s
pro se protest is not a model of clarity but appears to allege that the solicitation was improperly
drafted to restrict competition, that awarding the contract to a firm from outside of the District
would not provide economic benefits to the city, and that the method of making awards unfairly
harmed small businesses. On May 3, 2010, the District filed a motion to dismiss the protest,
alleging that Kennedy lacks standing to protest because it had the lowest technical score of the
four offerors and its price proposal was incomplete and therefore rejected by the contracting
officer. In addition, the District argues that to the extent that Kennedy is alleging improprieties
in the solicitation, such protest grounds are untimely because the protest was filed after award.
We conclude that Kennedy has not raised valid grounds for protest, that its challenges to the
solicitation are untimely, and that Kennedy has not shown prejudice in the awards that were
made. Accordingly, we dismiss Kennedy’s protest.

                                        BACKGROUND

        The Office of Contracting and Procurement (“OCP”) of the District Government issued
solicitation DCKT-2009-R-0120 in the open market for grounds keeping and landscaping
services on September 3, 2009. (Motion to Dismiss, Ex. 2). The solicitation required
prospective contractors to provide grounds maintenance, landscaping services, and other related
services to several District agencies. (Id.). The solicitation contemplated award of multiple
contracts, and stated that the District would award all of its requirements for each geographical
ward of the city to a single contractor. (Id.). Kennedy submitted a proposal to provide services
in Ward 8. (Motion, Exs. 4 and 5). The Technical Evaluation Panel (“TEP”) reviewed
Kennedy’s proposal and gave Kennedy a consensus score of 0 for all four technical factors
included in the solicitation. (Motion, Ex. 6). The contracting officer, after conducting his own
independent review, concurred with the TEP’s findings. (Id.). Kennedy also failed to provide
pricing for each contract line item number in its pricing proposal as required by the solicitation
and thus the contracting officer rejected Kennedy’s price proposal. (Id.). The District could not
calculate a total evaluation score for Kennedy due to Kennedy’s failure to provide a complete
                                                -2-                 Kennedy Development, LLC
                                                                                CAB No. P-0850


pricing proposal. (Id.). There were three vendors in line for award before Kennedy not
including Lorenz. The District could not award to Kennedy under any circumstance since its
price proposal was incomplete and its technical proposal was unacceptable. (Id.). The District
awarded a contract to Lorenz, Inc., on April 13, 2010. Kennedy filed this protest on April 15,
2010. In its protest, Kennedy alleges: the “contract [solicitation] did not include minimum and
maximum costs quotes” for the contract, the offeror’s experience in Washington, DC, was not
factored into the solicitation, the price per acre quoted by the awardee is not possible under
Davis Bacon Act wage scales, the awarded company is from out of state and economic benefit to
the city would be minimal, contracts were awarded in groups too large for small companies to be
competitive, awards should have been made to at least 4 companies and up to 8 companies,
contracts for Wards 3-8 were awarded to one company, and that contracts were awarded for up
to five years which “locks out” many small companies from competing.

                                         DISCUSSION

        In the motion to dismiss, the District argues that Kennedy lacks standing to protest
because Kennedy would not be the next offeror in line for award, even if successful on the
merits. Kennedy did not file a response to the District’s motion. A protester lacks standing
where it would not be in line for award, even if its protest was sustained. Kennedy received a
technical score of 0 for all four technical evaluation factors set forth in the solicitation, and
Kennedy failed to provide a complete price proposal. Kennedy has not raised any valid protest
challenge to the award made to Lorenz and had not shown that its offer could have been
considered for award in any event due to its unsatisfactory technical proposal and incomplete
price proposal. Thus, we dismiss Kennedy’s protest as not raising valid protest grounds, raising
untimely challenges to the terms of the solicitation, and failing to show how it was prejudiced by
the awards.

       SO ORDERED:

DATED: August 27, 2010                                /s/ Warren J. Nash
                                                      WARREN J. NASH
                                                      Administrative Judge



CONCURRING:


/s/ Jonathan D. Zischkau
JONATHAN D. ZISCHKAU
Chief Administrative Judge
