             DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD


PROTEST OF:


CNA CORPORATION                                       )
                                                      )      CAB No. P-0826
Solicitation No: DCKA-2009-B-0193                     )

       For the Protester, CNA Corporation: John C. Cheeks, CEO, pro se. For the District
of Columbia Government: Alton E. Woods, Esq., Assistant Attorney General.

       Opinion by Administrative Judge Warren J. Nash, with Chief Administrative Judge
Jonathan D. Zischkau, concurring.

                                         OPINION
                                       Filing ID 29422218


        Protester, CNA Corporation, challenges award of a contract and alleges that other
bidders committed non-collusion affidavit violations. The District filed a motion to dismiss
the protest, arguing that CNA’s bid was nonresponsive, CNA lacks standing as the fourth
lowest bidder, and CNA’s protest lacks a clear and concise statement of its legal and factual
grounds and is frivolous. We agree with the District that CNA’s bid was nonresponsive and
that its collusion allegations are meritless. Accordingly, we dismiss the protest with
prejudice.

                                     BACKGROUND

        On August 25, 2009, the Office of Contracting and Procurement (“OCP”) advertised
Invitation for Bids No. DCKA-2009-B-0193 (“IFB”) for the Citywide Safe Routes to School
Project in the Washington Times and posted it on its website. The solicitation, issued on
behalf of the District’s Department of Transportation (“DDOT”), was for multiple contractors
to provide the installation and reconstruction of small scale safety improvements on roadways
and at intersections within the District of Columbia. (Motion to Dismiss Ex. 1(a)). Bids were
due and received on September 28, 2009, as follows:

            1. Anchor Construction                    $2,161,473
            2. Capital Paving of DC                   $2,341,770
            3. Fort Myer Construction                 $2,344,870
            4. CNA                                    $2,376,095.90 as corrected
            5. Civil Construction                     $2,415,255
            6. Prince Construction                    $2,440,235
            7. Omni Excavators                        $2,617,405
            8. A&M Concrete Corp.                     $2,682,519.35 as corrected
            9. Potomac Construction Co.               $2,847,280
                                                -2-                      CNA Corp., CAB No. P-0826


(AR Ex. 5). Subsequent to the bid tabulation, the contracting officer informed CNA that a
mathematical error had been discovered in line 1200 of its bid regarding mobilization, and
that the amount had been adjusted to the allowable maximum amount of $189,337.90.

         The IFB required that bidders provide a bid security for a period of 90 working days
after bid opening. The appropriate bid guaranty form was made a part of the bidding
documents. (Motion to Dismiss Ex. 1 (a)). In the “Instructions to Bidders” section of the
Standard Contract Provisions for Construction Projects, Article 12, Bond Requirements,
bidders were informed that no bid will be accepted unless it is guaranteed by a bid bond with
good and sufficient sureties, a certified check payable to the District Treasurer, negotiable
United States bonds (at par value), or in an irrevocable letter of credit in an amount not less
than 5 percent of the bid as a bid guaranty. The “bid bond” submitted by CNA is an unsigned
letter to CNA from Tobi Wilkins of Quantum Corporate Funding, Ltd., dated September 25,
2009, stating:

       RE: FY-09 CITY-WIDE SAFE ROUTES TO SCHOOL

       GOVERNMENT OF THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA DEPARTMENT OF
       TRANSPORTATION

       DCKA-2009-B-0193 BID/CONTRACT AMOUNT $3,194,813.00

       OFFER EXPIRES: DECEMBER 25, 2009 @ 2:00 PM EST

       This letter will verify that your letter of credit/factoring line (75%) is, indeed,
       in place. We will purchase whatever invoices you submit to us that we can
       verify in writing with your procurement officer that the work you are billing
       for has been performed and accepted or the services you are billing for has
       been rendered…dollar amount is correct and they will pay Quantum.

       I am attaching the letter they would have to sign for their perusal and OK.

(Motion to Dismiss, Ex. 6).

        On September 29, 2009, CNA filed its protest, asking the Board to: (1) grant its
protest based on the “NON-COLLUSION AFFIDAVIT violations” of companies that
responded to the IFB (except CNA); (2) “dismiss all companies listed who submitted bids by
engaging or sharing common board of director(s), ownership affiliation, financial interest,
family relations or Sub Contractor single tier price fixing and violation of non-collusion
affidavit”; and (3) that “DC OCP/DC DOT release and suspend all affiliated companies listed,
in violation of the NON-COLLUSION AFFIDAVIT, from bidding on solicitations and
performing DC Public Works Contracts for a period of seven years each from 09/28/09 to
12/30/16.” CNA has presented no documents or other evidence to support its allegations.

        On October 19, 2009, the contracting officer, Mr. Jerry Carter, executed a declaration
respecting the protest stating, in part, that:
                                                -3-                    CNA Corp., CAB No. P-0826




               5. In two prior protests before the CAB (P-0794 and P-0810), as in this
       protest, CNA has made the same allegation of collusive bidding by other
       contractors. In each case, in accordance with 27 DCMR § 1007.2, I requested
       that CNA provide documents to me to support the allegations. CNA never
       provided any documents to me to support the allegations.

               6. On May 18, 2009, I attended a meeting with John C. Cheeks,
       CNA’s CEO, to discuss bids that he had submitted on other solicitations, and
       to also discuss his allegation of collusive bidding among bidders. The
       meeting was held at the Office of Contracting and Procurement (OCP) and
       was also attended by Alton E. Woods, from the District’s Office of the
       Attorney General. In this meeting Mr. Cheeks told me that he had documents
       to support all of the allegations and would provide them to me after the
       meeting. I told Mr. Cheeks that if he provided evidence to me to support the
       allegations of collusive bidding, that I would investigate the matter and refer
       the issue to the District’s Chief Procurement Officer, as required by 27
       DCMR § 1007.2. As of this date, Mr. Cheeks has not provided any
       information to me to support this assertion.

(Motion to Dismiss Ex. 5).

       On October 19, 2009, the District filed a motion to dismiss. On November 9, 2009,
CNA responded to the District’s motion to dismiss. On November 30, 2009, the District filed
a determination and finding to proceed with contract award and performance (“D&F”). On
December 8, 2009, CNA filed its opposition to the D&F, and a statement at paragraph 3 that:
“CNA shall continue to file bid protests with the approval of District of Columbia Contract
Appeals Board each time when CNA is exposed to bid rigging, non-collusion violations,
discrimination and/or contract steering. . . .”

                                        DISCUSSION

       We exercise jurisdiction pursuant to D.C. Code § 2-309.03(a)(1).

       A. Responsiveness of CNA’s Bid

       The IFB required that bidders provide a bid security for a period of 90 working days
after bid opening. The appropriate bid guaranty form was made a part of the bidding
documents. In the “Instructions to Bidders” section of the Standard Contract Provisions for
Construction Projects, Article 12, Bond Requirements, bidders were informed that no bid will
be accepted unless it is guaranteed by a bid bond with good and sufficient sureties, a certified
check payable to the District Treasurer, negotiable United States bonds (at par value), or in an
irrevocable letter of credit in an amount not less than 5 percent of the bid as a bid guaranty.

        We have consistently recognized that a bid bond is a material requirement because it is
a type of security that assures that a bidder will not withdraw its bid within the time specified
                                                -4-                     CNA Corp., CAB No. P-0826


for acceptance and, if required, will execute a written contract and furnish payment and
performance bonds. The purpose of a bid bond is to secure the liability of a surety to the
government in the event the bidder fails to fulfill these obligations. When a bidder supplies a
defective bond, the bid itself is rendered defective and must be considered nonresponsive.
Nation Capital Builders, LLC, CAB No. P-0761, Nov. 20, 2007, 57 D.C. Reg. 741; NAPA
Development Corp., CAB No. P-0384, Nov. 19, 1993, 41 D.C. Reg. 3839.

       Clearly, CNA did not submit with its bid a proper surety bond, but rather a letter from
a company promising to purchase invoices from CNA upon the completion of performance,
and only if the “procurement officer verifies that the work has been performed.” In this case,
CNA’s failure to submit adequate bid security in strict accordance with the IFB instructions
rendered its bid nonresponsive.

       B. Standing

       Because CNA’s bid is nonresponsive, it is not in line for award and therefore lacks
standing to raise other challenges regarding an award. C.P.F. Corp., CAB No. P-0521, Jan.
12, 1998, 45 D.C. Reg. 8697, 8699 (the Board will not consider protests by bidders who are
not next in line for award if the protest is sustained).

       C. Collusion Allegations

        As detailed above, CNA has made a number of vague and unsupported allegations of
collusion among the other bidders. Although CNA lacks standing, we address these
allegations so that CNA will not repeat its baseless allegations in the future. Board Rule
301.1(c) requires that a protest contain “a clear and concise statement of the legal and factual
grounds of the protest, including copies of relevant documents, citations to statutes,
regulations, or solicitation provisions claimed to be violated.” In its response to the District’s
motion to dismiss, CNA merely reargues its allegations of collusion and attaches a listing of
various named individuals for the other bidders and their relationships with the other bidders’
representatives. Neither its protest nor its response to the District’s motion to dismiss
provides support for its collusion allegations. Accordingly, we dismiss this protest ground as
wholly unsupported and bordering on the frivolous. CNA has raised the issue of collusive
bidding in two prior protests before the Board (P-0794 and P-0810) and in none of the cases
has CNA supported its allegations. Both the PPA and the Board’s rules provide for sanctions
where the Board determines that a protest is frivolous:

       The Board may dismiss, at any stage of the proceedings, any protest, portion
       of a protest, it deems frivolous. In addition, the Board may require the
       protester to pay the agency attorney fees, at the rate of $100 per hour, for the
       time counsel spent representing the agency in defending the frivolous protest
       or its frivolous parts. If the entire protest is dismissed on frivolous grounds,
       it may also assess the protester damages for each day the contract was
       suspended equal to the amount of liquidated damages specified in the
       contract for late completion of the contract. The Board shall not determine
       damages, if liquidated damages are not specified in the contract. In addition,
                                                -5-                  CNA Corp., CAB No. P-0826


       counsel for the protester may be suspended or barred from practicing before
       the Board.

D.C. Code § 2-309.08(g); Board Rule 308.2. Because CNA is represented by its owner, Mr.
Cheeks, and not by counsel, we will not assess sanctions at this time. However, if CNA were
to file similar unsupported allegations in the future, we will consider sanctions.

       We dismiss the protest with prejudice.

       SO ORDERED.

DATED: February 5, 2010                               /s/ Warren J. Nash
                                                      WARREN J. NASH
                                                      Administrative Judge

CONCURRING:


/s/ Jonathan D. Zischkau
JONATHAN D. ZISCHKAU
Chief Administrative Judge
