                 DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD


PROTEST OF:

CITELUM DC, LLC                                       )
                                                      )            CAB No. P-0922
Solicitation No.: DCKA-2011-R-0150                    )


For the protester: Douglas Proxmire and Elizabeth Gill, Patton Boggs, LLP. For the intervenor:
Lawrence Prosen of Thompson Hine, LLP. For the District of Columbia government: Alton Woods,
Assistant Attorney General.

Opinion by: Administrative Judge Maxine E. McBean with Chief Administrative Judge Marc D. Loud,
Sr. and Administrative Judge Monica C. Parchment concurring.


                                                OPINION
 AND ORDER DENYING THE DISTRICT'S MOTION TO DISMISS WITHOUT PREJUDICE
                                      AND/OR STAY PROCEEDINGS
                                             Filing ID #49874586



        Citelum DC, LLC ("Citelum" or "protester") filed the present protest on July 19, 2012,
challenging the District's award of the Citywide Streetlight Asset Management Services contract (the
"Contract") to M.C. Dean, Inc. ("MCD" or "intervenor"). The Board held a telephone conference with
the parties and intervenor on November 20, 2012, wherein we advised the parties of our preliminary
conclusion that the record supported a finding that the District's actions in awarding this procurement
violated procurement laws and regulations. The District thereafter filed a motion to dismiss without
prejudice or, alternatively, motion to stay based on corrective action. (District's Mot. to Dismiss Protest
Without Prejudice or Mot. to Stay the Protest Based on Corrective Action [hereinafter District's Mot. to
Dismiss or Stay] 2.) The protester has filed its opposition thereto while the intervenor has filed its
response to protester's opposition.

        Upon review of the entire record, we sustain the protest and deny the District's motion to dismiss
or stay. The District failed to identify a contracting officer ("CO") for this procurement who was
responsible for exercising oversight of the evaluation process, the CO failed to conduct a cost realism
analysis prior to the proposed contract award to MCD, and the District failed to treat the offerors equally
by permitting one offeror, MCD, to take exception to the LED requirement of the Request for Proposals
("RFP"). Consequently, the District's proposed corrective action does not remedy the improprieties in
                                                                                             Citelum DC, LLC
                                                                                             CAB No. P-0922

this procurement. Accordingly, the Board hereby orders the District to undertake the following corrective
action:


          (1) withdraw any proposed award to MCD;
          (2) designate a CO to perform responsibilities as required by the District's procurement Jaw
              including, but not limited to, conducting a cost price analysis, ensuring that the evaluation
              factors are applied equally and consistently to each offeror, and making a source selection;
          (3) reissue the solicitation, as necessary, to adequately identify the District Department of
              Transportation's ("DDOT's") minimum contract requirements;
          ( 4) provide the offerors an opportunity to submit revised proposals, consistent with the
              solicitation's minimum requirements, in order to conduct new technical and price evaluations
              of those proposals; and
          (5) reevaluate the final proposals for technical requirements compliance and pricing in a manner
              consistent with the terms of the solicitation and relevant procurement laws and regulations.


                                              BACKGROUND


          On August 9, 2011, the District's Office of Contracting and Procurement ("OCP"), on behalf of
DDOT, issued Solicitation No. DCKA-2011-R-0150 (the "Solicitation" or "RFP") which sought a
contractor to perform asset management services to maintain, rehabilitate, and preserve approximately
70,000 lighting assets and supporting systems within the District of Columbia. (Agency Report ("AR") at
Ex. 1, §§ B.l-B.l.l.) The District intended to issue a firm-fixed-price contract consisting of a base year
with four additional option years.      (!d. at § B.2.l.) Award of the contract would go to the offeror
providing the best value to the District by achieving substantial energy and cost savings while
maintaining good service quality. (Id.)


          The RFP's initial deadline to submit bids was September 9, 2011.         (/d. at § L.3.1.) It was
subsequently amended four times before submission of the first proposals on October 21, 2011. (AR at
4.) The amendments are as follows: (i) August 31, 2011, Amendment 1, extended the bid opening date
to October 6, 2011 (AR at Ex. 1,- Amend. 1); (ii) September 29,2011, Amendment 2, amended the Price
Schedule, amended Specifications, revised Contract Terms and Conditions, and provided responses to
questions from prospective offerors (AR at Ex.1, - Amend. 2); (iii) October 3, 2011, Amendment 3,
extended the proposal submission date to October 14, 2011, amended the Specifications, revised the
Contract Terms and Conditions, established a deadline to submit questions, and responded to additional
offeror questions (AR at Ex. 1, - Amend. 3); and (iv) October 11, 2011, Amendment 4, replaced the
                                                      2
                            TO BE DISCLOSED ONLY IN ACCORDANCE WITH
                DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD PROTECTIVE ORDER
                                                                                                  Citelum DC, LLC
                                                                                                   CAB No. P-0922

RFP's initial CO, Mr. Jerry Carter, with a new CO, Ms. Cora Boykin, amended Specifications, revised
Contract Terms and Conditions, and responded to additional offeror questions (AR at Ex. 1,- Amend. 4).


The Chronology

         This procurement has been the subject of two protests. By way of background, on October 21,
2011, the first proposals were submitted by Citelum, MCD and W.A. Chester, LLC ("Chester"), which is
not a party to this protest. 1    (AR at Ex. 3 (1) - Citelum Proposal, Ex. 3 (l) -Technical Proposal -
Chester, Ex. 4     Dean Proposal - Volume 1, Ex. 7 ( 1).) The proposals were evaluated and scored by
members of DDOT's proposal evaluation panel ("Panel") between October 21 and 30, 2011. (See AR at
Ex. 7 (1).)      On October 31, 2011, the Panel convened to adjust the individual scores of the offeror
proposals - based on discussions of the strengths and weaknesses of each proposal - and average them to
determine a final score for each offeror. (!d.)         Although concerns were noted with each, the Panel
determined all of the proposals to be technically acceptable. (Id.) The following evaluation summary was
documented by the Pane1. 2


                              Chester                        Citelum                     MCDean
 Rank
 Bid$
 Price Score
 Tech Score
 Total


(Id.)


         In November 2011, DDOT held oral presentations and clarification discussions with each of the
offerors. (AR at Ex. 7 (3).) On December 6, 2011, DDOT sent letters to each offeror requesting Best and
Final Offers ("BAFOs") that were to be submitted no later than 2:00 p.m. on December 20, 2011. (Id.;
AR at Exs. 6, 6 (1), 8.) The requests for BAFOs included a requirement that the offerors propose the




1
  Fort Myer Construction, Inc. also submitted a proposal; however, its proposal was submitted after the bid opening
date and, therefore, found non-responsive so as to preclude Fort Myer Construction from further participation in the
process.
2
  The evaluation memorandum also recommended that the offerors provide clarification on prices, incomplete
documentation, insufficient references, innovative plan details, and conditions to the proposals. (AR at Ex. 7 (I).)
                                                         3
                            TO BE DISCLOSED ONLY IN ACCORDANCE WITH
                DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD PROTECTIVE ORDER
                                                                                                     Citelum DC, LLC
                                                                                                     CAB No. P-0922

installation of an extra 30,000 LED lighting fixtures in addition to the initial 2,500 LED requirement in
the RFP. (AR at Exs. 6, 6 (1).)


            The three offerors all submitted BAFOs ("1st BAFOs") on December 20, 2011. (AR at Ex. 8.)
The Panel met on December 22 and 23, 2011, and January 3, 2012, to evaluate the 1st BAFOs. (Id.) In a
January 24, 2012, evaluation memorandum to Mr. Carter, the Panel recommended award of the contract
to Citelum. (AR at Ex. 8.) The following summary was reflected in the evaluation memorandum:


                                      Citelum DC                     MC Dean                      WA Chester
    Rank
    Bid$
    Technical
    Price Score
    Total


(Jd.)


            On February 23, 2012, MCD timely filed the first protest in this procurement by challenging the
                                                                                                                      3
award to Citelum. (AR at Ex. 10.) On March 21, 2012, the District filed a consent motion to dismiss,
(AR at Ex. 11), which resulted in the protest being dismissed by the Board on March 23, 2012. MC.
Dean, Inc., CAB No. P-0906, 2012 WL 4753870 (Mar. 23, 2012). On April 12, 2012, Ms. Courtney
Lattimore sent letters to each of the three offerors requesting a new BAFO ("2nd BAFO"), (AR at Exs. 13
(1), 13 (2), 13 (3)), and the three offerors submitted 2nd BAFOs on April27, 2012, (AR at Ex. 17 (1)).


            The Panel reviewed the 2nd BAFOs and met on May 4, 2012, to discuss its observations regarding
the strengths and weaknesses of each proposal. (Id.)             In a letter dated June 15, 2012, Ms. Lattimore
requested clarifications from Citelum with respect to its 2nd BAFO submission. 4 (Protest at Ex. 6.) She




3
  The motion to-dismiss provided that the District would undertake the following cmTective action: (i) the District
would not proceed with the proposed award and rescind the February 7, 2012, notice of award letter sent to Citelum;
(ii) the District would amend the RFP to ensure that the RFP properly and completely set forth the District's
minimum needs and contained all required and applicable clauses; (iii) the District would advise each offeror of the
weaknesses and deficiencies in their initial proposal; and (iv) the District would request BAFOs trom each offeror.
(AR at Ex. 11.)
4
  The Board presumes that DDOT sent similar letters to the other offerors although those letters are not in the record.
                                                          4
                              TO BE DISCLOSED ONLY IN ACCORDANCE WITH
                  DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD PROTECTIVE ORDER
                                                                                                  Citelum DC, LLC
                                                                                                   CAB No. P-0922

                                                                                        5
also asked that Citelum submit its 3rd BAFO ("3rd BAFO") by June 22, 2012.                  (!d.) Between June 22
and 29, 2012, MCD, Citelum and Chester all submitted revised final BAFOs. (AR at Ex. 26,             ~   32, 34.)


           On June 29, 2012, the Panel reviewed and scored the final BAFOs. (AR at Ex. 7 (4).)                      In
addition, the Panel reviewed the offerors' responses to the clarification letters and scored the price
proposals. (!d.)


Price score summary:
Offeror            Offeror's Proposed       Offeror's Corrected          Price to be Scored        Price        Rank
                      BAFO Price               BAFO Price

M.C.
Dean
Citelum
DC
W.A.
Chester


(!d. at 3.)


The resulting technical and price score summary:
              Rank
              Offeror
        Technical Score
          Price Score
         Total Score


(!d.)




5
  According to Ms. Lattimore, MCD and Chester submitted their 3rd BAFOs on June 22, 2012. (AR at Ex. 26, ~ 32.)
But Citelum claims that it did not receive DDOT's June 15 1h request for a 3'd BAFO and, therefore, failed to submit
a 3'd BAFO by the due date. (!d.) At Citelum's request, DDOT extended the final BAFO submission deadline to
June 29, 2012, for all offerors. (ld at~ 33.) Thereafter, Citelum alleges that MCD had the opportunity to submit 4
BAFOs (on June 22 and again on June 29, 2012) whereas Citelum submitted a total of 3 BAFOs. (Protest 28.)
According to the District, however, MCD was required to retrieve its June 22, 2012, proposal submission and
resubmit it on June 29, 2012. (District's Comments on Citelum DC, LLC's Supp. Grounds of Protest & Citelum's
Comments on the District's AR [hereinafter District's Comments on Supp. Protest].)
                                                          5
                               TO BE DISCLOSED ONLY IN ACCORDANCE WITH
                   DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD PROTECTIVE ORDER
                                                                                                       Citelum DC, LLC
                                                                                                       CAB No. P-0922

Based on the above scores of the final BAFOs, the Panel determined MCD's proposal to be the "best
value to the District" and it recommended award of the Contract to MCD. 6 (!d.) Notably, the record is
void of any information that the CO conducted an independent evaluation of the Panel's findings.


         Finding itself on the losing side of the award, on July 19, 2012, Citelum filed the instant protest.
(Protest 1.) In doing so, Citelum enumerated at least eleven grounds for protest. (See Protest; Citelum
DC, LLC's Supplemental Grounds of Protest & Comments on the Agency Report [hereinafter Supp.
Protest].) On July 25, 2012, the proposed awardee, MCD, moved the Board to intervene in the protest.
(Mot. to Intervene 1.)


         On September 25, 2012, the District's Chief Procurement Officer filed with the Board a
determination and finding to proceed with award while a protest is pending ("D&F"). (District of
Columbia's Determination to Proceed with Contract Performance [hereinafter District's D&F] at Ex. 1.)
On September 28, 2012, the Board held a telephone conference with the parties wherein it challenged the
findings set forth in the D&F by the District. Subsequently, the District filed a notice to withdraw the
D&F. (District of Columbia's Notice to Withdraw District's D&F.) In its Order, the Board stated that it
                                                                                                   7
"did not find credible the District's contention that the emergency contract with Chester could not have
been extended until issuance of the Board's merits decision in this matter." (Order Following the
District's Notice to Withdraw District's D&F 1.)


Terms of the RFP


         The RFP set forth the District's requirement for a single contractor to perform asset management
services for specific lighting assets within the District. (AR at Ex. 1,- RFP, § B.l.) The contractor would
be required to manage and rehabilitate over 70,000 lighting assets and support systems, the South Capitol
Bridge electrical system, the Welcome to Washington signs and their structures, and all electrical
components such as panels and junction boxes that contain equipment and materials covered by the
Contract. (ld. at § B.1.1.) As such, the District required that its "comprehensive group of assets need to
be maintained, rehabilitated, administered, and managed effectively to achieve the performance




6
  The Panel's contract award recommendation, and ail other con·espondence intended for the CO, was issued to Mr.
Carter notwithstanding his replacement by Ms. Boykin as CO. (AR at Ex. I,- Amend. 4.)
7
  Immediately prior to the District's issuance of the D&F, Chester had been providing interim services for lighting in
the District. (Citelum DC, LLC's Emergency Opp'n to the District's D&F (hereinafter Citelum's Opp'n to District's
D&F] 3; District's Resp. to Citelum's Opp'n to District's D&F 2.)
                                                          6
                            TO BE DISCLOSED ONLY IN ACCORDANCE WITH
                DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD PROTECTIVE ORDER
                                                                                              Citelum DC, LLC
                                                                                              CAB No. P-0922

standards" of the RFP and "[t]he broad scope of the work necessitates both a good management plan and
a positive partnering relationship." (Id.)


         Initially, the RFP requested "proposals which will allow for rapid implementation of LED
lighting throughout the District," and required the replacement of 2,500 obsolete and defective fixtures.
(!d. at§ B.l.3.) In a letter to the offerors dated December 6, 2012, DDOT amended the minimum LED
                                                                                                      8
requirement by requiring an extra 30,000 LED fixtures in addition to the initial amount of 2,500.         (!d. at
Exs. 6, 6 (1).)     Therefore, the offerors were ultimately required to propose an upgrade of 32,500 LED
fixtures. (See id.)   The RFP also required that the proposals "provide enough detail for DDOT to assess
the price realism of the suggestions." (AR at Ex. 1- RFP, § B.2.1.2.3.)


        Section L of the RFP provided specific instructions, conditions and notices that needed to be
addressed in each offeror's proposaL It also advised potential offerors that "this is a request for proposals
and not an invitation for bids" and that award would not be based on price alone. (!d. at § L.2.1.) It
stated that DDOT "reserves the right to hold discussions and seek clarifications prior to award." (Id.)


        Section M of the RFP identified the evaluation factors and advised offerors that a contract would
be awarded "to the offeror whose offer is technically acceptable to DDOT/TOA, and offers the best value
to the District as determined by the overall score from the evaluation criteria." (Id. at § M.l.) Technical
proposals were to be rated based upon the extent to which each offeror demonstrated "their experience,
knowledge and understanding of issues relating to preservation and maintenance of the assets covered by
[the] RFP." (Id. at§ M.4.1.)


Procurement Improprieties

                                                                     9
        On November 20, 2012, the Board held a teleconference to discuss the status of the protest and
inform the parties of its preliminary finding that the procurement had not been conducted in a manner
consistent with the District's procurement laws and regulations. Chief among the Board's concerns was
the fact that Ms. Lattimore, the alleged CO, had never been appointed CO for the procurement, nor
fulfilled certain responsibilities required ofthe CO. In fact, she joined DDOT, the procuring agency, well

8
  Amendment 5, which was issued on April 12,2012, revised Section B.l.3 of the RFP to reflect this requirement.
(AR at Ex. 14 (1).)
9
  The following individuals participated in the telephone conference: Administrative Judge Maxine McBean and
Chief Administrative Judge Marc Loud for the DC Contract Appeals Board ("CAB"); Douglas Proxmire and
Elizabeth Gill of Patton Boggs LLP for the protester; Lawrence Prosen of Thompson Hine, LLP for the intervenor;
and Alton Woods, Jerry Carter and Courtney Lattimore for the District.
                                                       7
                              TO BE DISCLOSED ONLY IN ACCORDANCE WITH
                  DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD PROTECTIVE ORDER
                                                                                                      Citelum DC, LLC
                                                                                                      CAB No. P-0922

after the procurement was underway. (AR at Ex. 26.) The record is unclear as to who retained ultimate
responsibility for ensuring that this procurement complied with the requirements set forth in the D.C.
Mun. Regs. tit. 27, §§ 1614.2(d), 1618.1-1618.3, 1622.7, 1626.1-1626.3 (2002).


          In response to the Board's concerns, the District filed a motion requesting that the Board dismiss
the present protest without prejudice or, alternatively, stay the protest based on corrective action.
(District's Mot. to Dismiss or Stay.) Therefore, at issue is whether the corrective action proposed by the
District remedies certain violations of procurement law and regulation identified by the Board. Although
this Opinion does not address the merits of each protest ground, it identifies three main areas of
impropriety and sets forth the appropriate corrective remedy for the procurement.


         First, the absence of an identifiable CO to perform responsibilities consistent with the
requirements of the District's procurement law has created an impropriety that cannot rectify itself
retroactively, several months after the fact. 10 In other words, the District's failure to timely identify a
contracting officer is not remedied by a post hoc appointment of an official to rubber-stamp its earlier
decisions.


         Second, the record does not support a finding that certain requirements, such as conducting a cost
realism analysis, were in fact performed by the CO. In this case, it was not only a legally required step
given the CO's responsibility of source selection, (D.C. Mun. Regs. tit. 27, §§ 1614.2, 1614.3), it was also
prudent particularly since MCD's final BAFO consisted of an almost                                                  and
resulted in a final price                           scored. (Compare AR at Ex. 8, 26 (MCD's original BAFO
price) with AR at Ex. 21, 2 (MCD's final BAFO price).) MCD's price was reduced notwithstanding its
own previous statement that Citelum "underbid the project" because its price was less than MCD's then
price                              Supp. Protest 2, 4-5; AR at Ex. 10, 49 (MCD's Protest).)


         Third, the District failed to treat the offerors equally in that it allowed one offeror, MCD, to take
exception to the LED requirement of the Solicitation. As a result, MCD was able to bid more competitive
pricing by offering a combination of non-LED and LED lighting. (AR at Ex. 20- Dean Innovation Plan,


10
   A document titled "Contracting Officer's Independent Assessment" was not provided to the Board until
September 19, 2012, almost one month after the Agency Report had been entered into the record on August 21,
2012. The Contracting Officer's Independent Assessment document does not disclose the identity of the CO and is
not signed or dated. (District's Comments on Supp. Protest at Ex. 8.) It also contains information on proposal
clarifications that still needed to be addressed prior to the review of the third and final BAFOs. (I d.) Therefore, the
record is void of any documents to establish that the CO conducted a contemporaneous independent analysis of the
Panel's findings at the conclusion of the final BAFO or otherwise.
                                                           8
                            TO BE DISCLOSED ONLY IN ACCORDANCE WITH
                DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD PROTECTIVE ORDER
                                                                                                      Citelum DC, LLC
                                                                                                      CAB No. P-0922

§ 1.5 at n.l.) MCD's final BAFO also contained an exception to the Solicitation's LED requirement with
respect to underlit areas of the District. (!d. at § 1.5.5.1.) Therefore, MCD's proposal benefitted from
being evaluated under a different, more favorable, technical requirements standard than that adhered to by
the other offerors which ostensibly resulted in its lower pricing.




The District's Proposed Corrective Action

         The District's proposed corrective action is detailed in its motion to dismiss or stay. In short, the
District proposes to "not proceed" with a contract award to MCD. (District's Mot to Dismiss or Stay 2.)
rt seeks to also retroactively amend the solicitation to identifY Ms. Lattimore as the CO and, through her,
(i) conduct a new cost price analysis, (ii) review the proposals to determine whether offerors were
evaluated fairly, (iii) describe weaknesses that were identified to each offeror and explain how such
weaknesses were corrected, and (iv) review whether DDOT applied all of the evaluation factors
throughout the entire procurement (!d. at 2-3.)


         Citelum objects to the District's motion to dismiss or stay on the grounds that the proposed
corrective action fails to (i) withdraw the July 6, 2012, recommendation for award to MCD, (ii) identify to
offerors weaknesses in their proposals, (iii) identifY DDOT's minimum requirements, and (iv) provide
offerors an opportunity to submit revised proposals based on identified weaknesses and minimum
contract requirements. (Opp'n to the District's Mot to Dismiss/Mot. to Stay 3-4.) Furthermore, Citelum
contends that the corrective action, as proposed, fails to address the vast majority of its protest issues,
chief among them being that the District (i) permitted MCD to take exception to the RFP requirements,
(ii) disclosed to MCD Citelum 's material competitive advantages through technical transfusion, 11 (iii)
allowed MCD to propose non-LED materials that other offerors were discouraged from offering, (iv)
failed to follow the evaluation criteria in evaluating the proposals, and (v) accepted MCD's final revised
proposal despite the absence of a required conflict of interest certification. (!d. at 6-7.)




11
   Citelum alleges that in a November 9, 2011, meeting, it presented the District with the economic benefits of a
larger LED deployment, through energy consumption savings and cost of ownership savings, than the District
contemplated at that time. (Protest 17-20.) It further alleges that, following Citelum 's presentation, the District
increased the RFP's 2,500 LED requirement to 32,500 LEDs and thereby selectively disclosed Citelum's
competitive advantage. (ld.) The District denies the allegation and asserts that its realization that it could afford an
additional 30,000 LEDs was based on the pricing of the proposals and not due to any information obtained from
Citelum. (AR 9.)
                                                           9
                            TO BE DISCLOSED ONLY IN ACCORDANCE WITH
                DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD PROTECTIVE ORDER
                                                                                             Citelum DC, LLC
                                                                                             CAB No. P-0922

           MCD, the expected awardee, objects to protester's opposition to the District's motion to dismiss
or stay.     (Intervener M.C. Dean, Inc.'s Resp. to Citelum DC, LLC's Opp'n to the District's Mot. to
Dismiss/Mot. to Stay [hereinafter Intervenor's Resp.].) The principal issue in Intervenor's Response
relates to its argument that the District should be permitted to devise the appropriate corrective action to
achieve compliance with the District's procurement laws and regulations. (!d. at 6-7.) In that vein,
intervenor asserts that the District has conducted multiple rounds of BAFOs and that reopening
discussions, as advocated by protester, would "undermine the competitive procurement itself." (Id. at 8.)
MCD also details protester's alleged financial difficulties (which are not relevant to this Board's analysis
of whether the District conducted the procurement in a lawful manner), (Id. at 2-3), and challenges the
propriety of protester filing its opposition to the District's motion to dismiss or stay, (Id. at 6). However,
under Board Rule 116. 1, the Board may, on its own initiative, dispense with procedural provisions of the
rules for good cause shown (or to expedite a decision). Given the history and complexity of this protest,
the Board has taken into account the arguments of protester and intervenor in rendering its decision
regarding the District's proposed corrective action.


                                                DISCUSSION


Board's Jurisdiction and Standard of Review

           We exercise jurisdiction over this protest and its underlying allegations pursuant to D.C. Code §
2-360.03(a)(l) (2011).      In sustaining the protest, the issue before the Board is whether to grant the
District's motion to dismiss or stay in light of the procurement improprieties identified by the Board. As
noted correctly by intervenor, there is limited precedent from this Board on corrective action-related
issues. (Intervenor's Resp. 6.) Therefore, as in previous instances, we have referred to decisions by the
Comptroller General for guidance 12 in setting forth the standard of review.


           Intervenor contends that the protester seeks to dictate to DDOT the corrective action that it must
take rather than permit DDOT to exercise the discretion to which it is entitled in crafting any corrective
action. (Id. 6.) Intervenor cites Alliant Techsystem, Inc., B-405129.3, 2012 CPD      ~50   (Comp. Gen. Jan.
23, 2012), for the proposition that "[c ]ontracting officers in a negotiated procurement have broad
discretion to take corrective action where the agency determines that such action is necessary to ensure a
fair and impartial competition." (Intervenor's Resp. 7.) It also cites Rel-Tek Sys. & Design, Inc., B-
280463.7, 99-2 CPD ~ 1 (Comp. Gen. July 1, 1999) to underscore its assertion that, "[a]s a general matter,

12
   See, e.g., O'Donnell Canst. Co., CAB No. P-0158, 39 D.C. Reg. 4479, 4485 (Mar. 24, 1992); Koba Associates,
Inc., CAB Nos. P-0344, P-0359, 40 D.C. Reg. 5003, 5013 (Mar. 3, 1993).
                                                       10
                             TO BE DISCLOSED ONLY IN ACCORDANCE WITH
                 DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD PROTECTIVE ORDER
                                                                                            Citelum DC, LLC
                                                                                            CAB No. P-0922

the details of implementing ... recommendations for corrective actions are within the sound discretion
and judgment of the contracting agency." (Intervenor's Resp. 7.) However, Rel-Tek Systems & Design,
Inc. also stands for the proposition that the agency's manner of compliance will not be questioned "so
long as it remedies the procurement impropriety that was the basis for the decision's recommendation."
Id. at *2. Moreover, in a case where the agency's corrective action was found to be unreasonable because
the agency had failed to conduct a reasonable cost realism analysis of the awardee's proposed costs, the
Government Accountability Office ("GAO") held that "[s]uch [agency] discretion must be exercised
reasonably and in a fashion that remedies the procurement impropriety that was the basis for our protest
recommendation." The Futures Grp. Int'l, B-281274.5 et al., 2000 CPD          ~   148 (Comp. Gen. Mar. 10,
2000) at *6 (citations omitted). The Board therefore holds that the standard of review of an agency's
proposed corrective action is whether the agency's discretion is exercised reasonably in a manner that
remedies the procurement impropriety.


The Evaluation Process


        In applying the above referenced standard of review to the proposed corrective action, we find
that the violations of law that occurred in this procurement during the most recent evaluation of proposals
are sufficiently material so as to sustain the protest yet the District's recommended course of action fails
to remedy the procurement's improprieties whereby (1) the District failed to identify the CO responsible
for the procurement, (2) the CO failed to conduct a cost realism analysis prior to the proposed contract
award to MCD, and (3) the District failed to treat the offerors equally by permitting MCD to take
exception to the Solicitation's LED requirements.


(1) The District Failed to IdentifY the CO Responsible for Conducting the Procurement


        The District proposes to retroactively amend the RFP effective March 2012 and recognize Ms.
Lattimore as the CO. (District's Mot. to Dismiss or Stay 2.) In doing so, the District argues that although
it had never identified Ms. Lattimore as the CO, she prepared and signed certain documents pursuant to
D.C. Mun. Regs. tit. 27, §§ 1614.3- 1626.1.     (!d.) Under the District's proposal, Ms. Lattimore would
review, revise, and amend, if necessary, any documents in the procurement file that require modit1cation.
(!d.) She would also conduct a new independent cost analysis. (Jd. at 3.) In conducting her analysis, Ms.
Lattimore would review the proposals to determine whether offerors were evaluated fairly. And, to the
extent that offerors may have been evaluated unfairly, she would correct such disparity.        (Id.)   Ms.
Lattimore would note weaknesses that were identified during the various evaluations and include a
description of each offeror's proposal modification to address or correct the identified weakness. (Jd.)

                                                     11
                          TO BE DISCLOSED ONLY IN ACCORDANCE WITH
              DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD PROTECTIVE ORDER
                                                                                               Cite/urn DC, LLC
                                                                                               CAB No. P-0922

She would also determine whether DDOT' s Panel used all of the evaluation factors throughout the entire
evaluation process. (Jd.)


         Notwithstanding the District's proffered corrective measures, the Board is concerned that a
solicitation that the District estimates is valued at over $1 00 million was conducted in the absence of a
correctly identified responsible party as CO. Initially, Mr. Carter was the named CO in the RFP issued
August 9, 2011. (AR at Ex. 1 - RFP, § 0.5.1.) Amendment Nos. 1 through 4 were signed by Mr. Carter
as CO, with Amendment No.4 serving to identifY Ms. Boykin as the new CO. (AR at Ex. 1- Amend. 4.)
However, there are no documents in the record to show that Ms. Boykin performed any CO
responsibilities 13 and, to the contrary, Amendment Nos. 5 through 7 were executed by Ms. Lattimore for
Mr. Carter as CO. (AR at Ex. 1- Amend. 7, Ex. 14- Amend. 6, Ex. 16- Amend. 5.) The later issued
Panel Findings and Recommendations were addressed to Mr. Carter, (AR at Exs. 7, 8, 21), while the
February 7, 2012, award letter to Citelum was signed by Mr. Carter as CO, (AR at Ex. 9), On September
19, 2012, the District submitted to the Board supplemental documents to the AR which, for the first time,
identified Ms. Lattimore as the CO.        (District's Comments on Supp. Protest 8.)            However, Ms.
Lattimore's declaration of August 20, 2012, appears to refute any argument that her role in this
procurement was that of CO. (AR at Ex. 26.) Not only does she fail to mention her responsibility as CO,
in paragraph 29 of her declaration, she states that "the Panel submitted an Evaluation Repott to the CO."
(/d.)   Lastly, the record bears no evidence that Mr. Carter, the originally-named CO, performed the CO
duties of analysis, documentation and source selection pursuant to the District's procurement law.


         It is well settled that the CO may not abdicate or delegate its responsibilities, 14 yet, the record
before us supports a finding that the CO's responsibilities were delegated to DDOT's Panel. Although a
technical evaluation panel can assist the CO in his decision, the CO remains responsible for the evaluation
of proposals and must conduct his own independent review. See, Urban Alliance Found., CAB Nos. P-
0886 et al., 2012 WL 4775002 (Feb. 15, 2012).          We have also noted that the CO has "a critical and
unique role" in the evaluation and selection process and, as such, have held that the CO is ultimately
responsible for the evaluation and for determining the relative merits of competing proposals. Health
Right, Inc., D.C. Health Coop., Inc., & The George Washington Univ., CAB Nos. P-0507, P-0510, P-
0511, 45 D.C. Reg. 8612, 8636 (Oct. 15, 1997). In this case, the record is void of any independent
evaluation by a CO in clear violation of procurement law.

13
   In the Business Clearance Memorandum dated July 17,2012, Ms. Boykin is identified as the Contract Specialist.
(District's Comments on Supp. Protest at Ex. I.)
14
    See, B&B Sec. Consultants, Inc. CAB Nos. P-0583, P-0585, 46 D.C. Reg. 8637, 8647 (June 18, 1999);
RideCharge, Inc., et al., CAB Nos. P-0920, P-0921 (Nov. 9, 2012).
                                                       12
                           TO BE DISCLOSED ONLY IN ACCORDANCE WITH
               DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD PROTECTIVE ORDER
                                                                                                    Citelum DC, LLC
                                                                                                    CAB No. P-0922


(2) The CO Failed to Conduct a Cost Realism Analysis prior to the Proposed Contract Award

           There is no record ofthe CO having performed and documented a contemporaneous cost realism
analysis pursuant to D.C. Mun. Regs. tit. 27, §§ 1614.2(d), 1618.1-1618.3, 1626.1-1626.3.                   Indeed,
the District states that the first cost realism analysis was conducted by members of the Panel on June 29,
2012, while a second cost realism analysis was performed by the CO after the instant protest was filed.
(District's Comments on Supp. Protest 3.) Therefore, by the District's own admission, the CO did not
perform a cost realism analysis until after the District announced the proposed award to MCD. Since the
District has stated that the technical scores of protester and intervenor were "essentially equal," MCD's
lower price proposal effectively resulted in MCD being recommended for contract award. (Id. at 12.)
Taking into account MCD's • • • • pricing adjustment relative to its earlier proposals, 15 the CO
needed to evaluate MCD's pricing proposal and document that analysis. Yet, Ms. Lattimore, the alleged
CO at the time, makes no mention of conducting a cost realism analysis prior to the Panel's July 6, 2012,
recommendation that the District award the contract to MCD. (See AR at Ex. 26.) The relevant District
of Columbia municipal regulations pertaining to the CO's duty to perform a cost price analysis are as
follows:


                    § 1614.2(d) Ensure selection of the source whose proposal has the
                                  highest degree of realism and whose performance is
                                  expected to best meet stated District requirements.

                   § 1618.1 The contacting officer shall evaluate each proposal in
                                  accordance with the evaluation criteria in the solicitation.

                   § 1618.2       The contracting officer shall evaluate the cost estimate or
                                  price, not only to determine whether it is reasonable, but also
                                  to determine the offeror's understanding of the work and
                                  ability to perform the contract.


                   § 1618.3       The contracting officer shall document the cost or price
                                  evaluation.


15
   Following its initial proposal and suc,secJueJI1t
price was less than MCD's then price of
later clarified that its


                                                          13
                             TO BE DISCLOSED ONLY IN ACCORDANCE WITH
                 DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD PROTECTIVE ORDER
                                                                                                Citelum DC, LLC
                                                                                                CAB No. P-0922

                 § 1626.1    The contracting officer shall be required to perform a cost
                             analysis in ...

                             (a) The award of any contract in excess of five hundred
                             thousand dollars ($500,000)

                 § 1626.2    When cost analysis is required, the contracting officer shall
                             perform      cost analysis   by   using   the   techniques   and
                             procedures set forth in this section.

                 § 1626.3    The contracting officer shall verify cost or pricing date (sic)
                             and evaluate the cost elements, including the following:

                             (a) The necessity for and reasonableness of the proposed
                             cost, including allowances for contingencies.

                 § 1622.7    The    contracting     officer    shall   prepare    supporting
                             documentation for the selection decision that shows the
                             relative differences among the proposals and their strengths,
                             weaknesses, and risks in terms of the evaluation factors. The
                             supporting documentation shall include the basis for the
                             selection.


        D.C. Mun. Regs. tit. 27, §§ 1614.2(d), 1618.1 - 1618.3, 1626.1 - 1626.3, 1622.7 (2002)
(emphasis added)


        MCD has asserted that the CO is not required nor expected to "self-perform and complete every
ministerial task involved with source selection," (Intervenor Comments 3) pursuant to this Board's
decision in Kidd Int'l Home Care, Inc., CAB No. P-0760, 57 D.C. Reg. 735 (Oct. 5, 2007). However, the
facts in the present case are readily distinguished from those in Kidd International Home Care, Inc. where
the CO made an "independent assessment of the (1) technical proposals, (2) BAFOs, (3) TEP [Panel]
evaluations, and (4) prices .... " Kidd Int'l Home Care, Inc., CAB No. P-0760, 57 D.C. Reg. at 737. In
this case, pricing was the difference in winning or losing the contract for award yet the CO herein not
only failed to perform the cost realism analysis, he failed to perform any of the legally-required analyses.
In light of the above-referenced regulatory requirements, the Board finds that the CO's failure to conduct


                                                     14
                           TO BE DISCLOSED ONLY IN ACCORDANCE WITH
               DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD PROTECTIVE ORDER
                                                                                                       Citelum DC, LLC
                                                                                                        CAB No. P-0922

and document a cost realism analysis of the offerors' proposals prior to contract award constituted a
violation of procurement taw.


(3) The District failed to Treat the Offerors Equally by Permitting One O.ff'eror to take Exception to the
       Solicitation's LED Requirement

            When the Citywide Streetlight Asset Management Services RFP was issued in August 2011, it
contained a minimum requirement for 2,500 LED fixtures. (AR at Ex.1, RFP (1) § B.l.3.)                     In its initial
offer in response to the RFP, Citelum's proposal exceeded the RFP's requested amount of 2,500 LED
fixtures and included a conversion upgrade of 8,241 LED fixtures and 6,399 CosmoPolis fixtures.
(Protest 17; AR at Ex. 3          Citelum Proposal, § 2.c.)        In the November 2011 request for clarification of
the offeror proposals, the District acknowledged that the respective offerors had proposed using non- LED
fixtures - CosmoPolis by Citelum and Ceramic Metal Halide ("CMH") by MCD - but signaled that it
"planned to go to energy-efficient LED lighting." (Supp. Protest 23.)                  In fact, even though Citelum had
met the RFP's then minimum LED requirement, the District indicated to Citelum that the use of non-LED
lighting in its proposal was "taking DDOT in a different direction that DDOT may not be willing to
follow." (Protest at Ex. 9.)


            On March 21, 2012, the District agreed to set forth its minimum needs for contract award when it
requested that the Board dismiss MCD's protest without prejudice. (AR, Ex. 11 at 2.) Notwithstanding its
earlier objecting comment to Citelum on the use of non-LED lighting, 16 the District did not clarify that a
proposal which included non-LED lighting, such as CosmoPolis or CMH, would meet its minimum
needs. Nonetheless, the District accepted and recommended for award MCD's offer which not only met
the District's revised RFP requirement of 32,500 LED fixtures, (AR at Ex. 6), but also included CMH
lighting in its final BAFO, (AR at Ex. 20

CMH fixtures as a • • • • • • • • •land that the
• • • • • • • • • • (Id. at n.1.)
                                                                     ··············t•••
                                                      Dean Innovation Plan, § 1.5).        MCD stated that it included




            Citelum therefore alleges that the District's November 14, 2011, request for clarification with
respect to non-LED fixtures resulted in it discontinuing the offer to provide non-LED CosmoPolis
fixtures. (Supp. Protest 22.) By failing to make clear that it would accept non-LED fixtures in addition
to LED fixtures, the District failed to establish its minimum contract needs in the revised RFP pursuant to
its March 21st motion and the Board's dismissal Order of March 23, 2012. Furthermore, when Citelum
had similarly proposed non-LED fixtures in addition to the RFP's required quantity of LED fixtures, the

16
     See, November 14, 2011, letter of clarification to Citelum. (Protest at Ex. 9.)
                                                              15
                               TO BE DISCLOSED ONLY IN ACCORDANCE WITH
                   DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD PROTECTIVE ORDER
                                                                                                    Citelum DC, LLC
                                                                                                    CAB No. P-0922

District expressed an unwillingness to go in that direction [of non-LED lighting]. By accepting MCD's
proposal, which included non-LED lighting, the District subjected the offerors to unequal treatment in
violation ofprocurement law. See D.C. Code§ 2-35l.Ol(b)(4) (2011).

         In addition, the District requested that the offerors provide adequate lighting solutions for under lit
areas in the city. (Intervenor Comments 17-18; Protest at Ex. 9, Ques. 5 g.) MCD responded that-


• • • • • • • • • • • • (AR at Ex. 20- Dean Innovation Plan, § 1.5.2.1.1.1.) Specifically,
MCD's response on the issue of providing lighting in underlit areas of the District contemplated three
possible scenarios:




(See AR at Ex. 20- Dean Innovation Plan, § 1.5.5.1.)


MCD further stated t h a t · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·


• • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • (!d. (emphasis added))                                 In other words, MCD's
proposal contemplated that M C D · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·


• • • • •lt::itelum's proposal did not include a similar pricing contingency in its response to the issue
of providing LED lighting in the District's underlit areas. Therefore, the offerors submitted proposals that
varied greatly in scope in response to the District's luminance requirements and the District accepted
MCD's proposal notwithstanding its exception to the Solicitation's LED requirement. 17


17
   In identifying its minimum needs for contract award, the District may either revise the RFP to permit proposals
that, under certain applications, are not required to utilize LED fixtures or disallow proposals containing exceptions
to that requirement.
                                               16
                            TO BE DISCLOSED ONLY IN ACCORDANCE WITH
                DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD PROTECTIVE ORDER
                                                                                                  Citelum DC, LLC
                                                                                                  CAB No. P-0922

         The District's failure to equally apply the Solicitation's LED lighting requirement to the otferors'
proposals resulted in the offerors responding to and being evaluated under different technical
requirements standards. As noted in Urban Alliance Found., CAB Nos. P-0886 et al., 2012 WL 4775002
(Feb. 15, 2012):


                   The unequal treatment of the offeror proposals seriously violated the
                   District's procurement law and undermined the integrity of the process.
                   See D.C. Code § 2-35l.Ol(b)(4) (2011) (stating that a purpose of the
                   Procurement Practices Reform Act of 2010 is to "ensure fair and
                   equitable treatment of all persons who deal with the procurement system
                   of the District government"); see also Rockwell Elec. Commerce Corp.,
                   B-286201 eta!, 2001 CPD, 65 (Comp. Gen. Dec. 14, 2000) ("It is ...
                   fundamental that the contracting agency ... treat all offerors equally,
                   which includes ... not disparately evaluating offerors with respect to the
                   same requirements.").

!d.

As stated above, the unequal treatment of offeror proposals violates District law and greatly undermines
the integrity of the procurement process. The District's proposed corrective action fails to remedy this
impropriety because it does not allow for new BAFOs from the offerors so as to ensure that they are
subject to equal technical requirements and evaluation standards.


                                                CONCLUSION


         Having sustained the protest on the grounds set forth herein, the Board finds it unnecessary to
address the protester's remaining allegations. However, finding that the District's proposed corrective
action was not a reasonable exercise of discretion and does not remedy the procurement's improprieties,
we deny the District's motion to dismiss the protest or stay the proceedings. Therefore, we hereby order
the District to undertake the corrective action of (i) withdrawing the proposed award to MCD; (ii)
identifying a CO to carry out those responsibilities required of a CO pursuant to the District's
procurement law including, but not limited to, D.C. Mun. Regs. tit. 27, §§ 1614.2(d), 1618.1- 1618.3,
1622.7, 1626.1 - 1626.3; (iii) reissuing the Solicitation, as necessary, to adequately identify DDOT's
minimum contract requirements; (iv) providing offerors an opportunity to submit revised proposals
consistent with the Solicitation's minimum requirements 18 in order for the District to conduct new
technical and price evaluations of those proposals; and (v) reevaluating the final proposals for technical

18
   We acknowledge intervenor's concern that the parties and intervenor may be prejudiced due to the impermissible
disclosure of technical and pricing information. However, we remind all who are subject to the terms of the
Protective Order that they have certified agreement to those terms and are subject to the consequences of violating
that agreement.
                                                        17
                            TO BE DISCLOSED ONLY IN ACCORDANCE WITH
                DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD PROTECTIVE ORDER
                                                                                                     Citelum DC, LLC
                                                                                                     CAB No. P-0922

requirements compliance and pricing in a manner consistent with the terms of the Solicitation and the
relevant procurement laws and regulations. 19


SO ORDERED:

DATED: March l, 2013                                                     /s/ Maxine E. McBean
                                                                         MAXINE E. MCBEAN
                                                                         Administrative Judge

CONCURRING:

/s/ Marc D. Loud, Sr.
MARC D. LOUD, SR.
Chief Administrative Judge

Is/ Monica C. Parchment
MONICA C. PARCHMENT
Administrative Judge


ELECTRONIC SERVICE TO:

Douglas C. Proxmire, Esq.                                                Alton Woods, Esq.
Elizabeth M. Gil, Esq.                                                   Assistant Attorney General
Patton Boggs LLP                                                         Office of the Attorney General
2550 M Street, N.W.                                                      55 M Street, S.E., i 11 Floor
Washington, D.C. 20037                                                   Washington, D.C. 20003

Lawrence M. Prosen, Esq.
Daniel Edwards, Esq.
Robe11 Lewis, Esq.
Kyle Baker, Esq.
Thompson Hine, LLP
1919 M Street, N.W., Suite 700
Washington, D.C. 20036




19
   The protester has additionally requested that the Board order the District to advise offerors of weaknesses in their
last submitted BAFOs. However, we find that through the successive rounds of BAFOs and clarifications the
offerors have been provided adequate notice and information with respect to the weaknesses contained in each of
their previous proposals. The District issued the offerors letters requesting clarifications in November 2011 (MCD
on Nov. loth, Citelum on Nov. 14th and W.A. Chester on Nov. 171      h); and via requests for BAFOs on June 15,2012
(to MCD and Citelum). (E-mail from Alton Woods, Esq., Assistant Attorney Gen., DDOT, to Albert Wilcox,
Admin. Officer, CAB (Nov. 14, 2012, 13:44 EST) (on file with CAB) (cc'ing all parties) at Items B, C.) DDOT
also responded to questions posed by the offerors. (See, AR at Ex. 1 -Amend. 3, Ex. 1 -Amend. 4, Ex. 1 -Amend.
7, Ex. 14- Amend. 6.) These requests for clarification and amendments in response to offeror questions addressed
DDOT's concerns regarding the oflerors' proposals.
                                                          18
                            TO BE DISCLOSED ONLY IN ACCORDANCE WITH
                DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD PROTECTIVE ORDER
