                   DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD



PROTEST OF:

PSYCHIATRIC INSTITUTE OF WASHINGTON, INC.                        )
                                                                 )        CAB No. P-0905
                                                                 )
Under Solicitation No. RM-11-RFP-83-BY4-VM                       )
                                                                 )


        For Psychiatric Institute of Washington, Inc.: Jeffrey Weinstein, Esq., Jeffrey Weinstein, PLLC.
For the District of Columbia Government: Janice N. Skipper, Esq., Assistant Attorney General.

       Opinion by Administrative Judge Maxine E. McBean with Chief Administrative Judge Marc D.
Loud, Sr., and Administrative Judge Monica C. Parchment concurring.

                                                OPINION
                                           Filing ID 45653191

         Psychiatric Institute of Washington, Inc. (“PIW” or “protester”), has filed a protest challenging
the District’s decision to award Pathways to Housing DC (“Pathways”) a contract pursuant to Solicitation
No. RM-11-RFP-83-BY4-VM (“solicitation” or “RFP”) issued by the District of Columbia Department of
Mental Health Contracts and Procurement Administration (“DMH”). The solicitation requested proposals
to “operate an Urgent Care Clinic at the DC Superior Court (UCC).” (AR at Ex. 1, § C.3.1.) The
protester’s challenge generally concerns allegations that (1) the District unreasonably evaluated the
offeror technical proposals, and (2) the District treated offerors unequally in that Pathways was afforded
additional opportunities to correct deficiencies in its proposal while PIW was not afforded comparable
opportunities. (See Comments on AR/ Resp. to Mot. to Dismiss 2-15, Mar. 27, 2012 [hereinafter
“Comments on AR”].) On March 9, 2012, the District filed a motion to dismiss for protester’s alleged
failure to comply with the requirements of Board Rule 301.1(c) which require protester to present a clear
and concise statement of the legal and factual grounds of the protest. (Mot. to Dismiss 6-7, Mar. 9, 2012.)
On May 16, 2012, the District filed a “Determination and Findings to Proceed with Contract Performance
while a Protest is Pending” (“D&F”). Following protester’s successful challenge on July 9, 2012, to a
Board Order dated June 22, 2012, sustaining the D&F, see Wis. Ave. Psychiatric Ctr., Inc. v. D.C. Dep’t
of Mental Health, C.A. No. 005211 B (D.C. Super. Ct. July 3, 2012), the District filed a second D&F.
(See Notice of Supplement to Determination to Proceed with Contract Performance While A Protest is
Pending, Ex. 1 [hereinafter “Second D&F”].)

        We deny the District’s motion to dismiss finding that PIW’s protest grounds are sufficiently clear
to meet the standard established by Board Rule 301.1 and that the Agency Report has provided the Board
with sufficient evidence to rule on the merits of the claim. However, the Board finds no evidence in the
record that the District evaluated the offeror technical proposals unreasonably or that the District
unlawfully treated the offerors in an unequal manner. Accordingly, the protest is denied. Protester’s
motion to override the Second D&F is also denied as moot.

                                            BACKGROUND

        On May 24, 2011, DMH issued a solicitation requesting proposals to “operate an Urgent Care
                                                                           Psychiatric Institute of Washington, Inc.
                                                                                                   CAB No. P-0905


Clinic at the DC Superior Court (UCC).” (AR at Ex. 1, § C.3.1.) The RFP sought “a Contractor to
provide individuals [who have contact with the court system] with mental health and/or substance abuse
service in an easily accessible service environment located at the Superior Court.” (AR at Ex. 1, § B.1.)
PIW had been providing services similar to those requested under the RFP pursuant to a contract
beginning May 16, 2008, with a Base Year and two One Year Option periods. (D & F ¶ 3.d, May 14,
2012.)1 The RFP was revised twice prior to the deadline for receipt of proposals on June 27, 2011. The
revisions are as follows: (i) on June 13, 2011, (Amendment No. 1), the District’s responses to questions
by prospective offerors were incorporated into the contract and amendments were made to certain
sections of the RFP, (AR at Ex. 2) and (ii) on June 20, 2011, (Amendment No. 2), additional questions by
prospective offerors were responded to and the responses were incorporated into the RFP (AR at Ex. 3).

Terms of the RFP

         Section C of the solicitation detailed the technical requirements entitled “Description/
Specifications/Work Statement.” The following are the requirements of particular relevance to this
protest:

        § C.6            The Scope of Work (SOW) for the UCC at the District of
                         Columbia Superior [Court] is delineated in the sections that
                         follow. All Prospective Contractors shall clearly describe how
                         each of these requirements shall be addressed in the proposal.

        § C.6.1          The staffing pattern of the UCC shall include a team comprised
                         of mental health and substance abuse clinicians. The staffing
                         pattern shall be sufficient to provide services to a minimum of
                         300 individuals per year. The staff team will be led by a
                         psychiatrist who will be responsible for the overall supervision
                         and management of the UCC. The psychiatrist shall be available
                         on a daily basis to see individuals referred for service within 90
                         minutes of presenting at the UCC.

        § C.6.1.2        The UCC shall employ three staff, including two Certified
                         Addiction Counselors (CACs), to provide substance abuse
                         screening, assessment and referral services. The staff shall have
                         the capacity to conduct the Global Appraisal of Individual Needs
                         (GAIN) assessment. . . .

        § C.7            In addition to the contract funding, the selected Contractor shall
                         be expected to have the capacity to bill Medicaid for all
                         appropriate reimbursable services including mental health
                         rehabilitation services (MHRS), Medicaid fee for service and/or
                         the Managed Care Organizations (MCOs).

        § C.9.1          Prospective contractors responding to the RFP shall provide
                         detailed responses to the requirements described in the Scope of
                         Work.

1
 PIW’s contract expired on May 15, 2011, however a Single Available Source Contract (“SAS”) was issued to PIW
on May 16, 2011, and extended to May 15, 2012. (D & F ¶ 3.d, May 14, 2012.) The District then issued another
short term SAS contract to facilitate the transition from PIW to the awardee under the RFP.

                                                     2
                                                                          Psychiatric Institute of Washington, Inc.
                                                                                                  CAB No. P-0905


                                                       ***
                         [A]ll proposals must include a proposed budget which delineates
                         expected revenues from billings as well as needed contract and
                         client support dollars. The budget shall include line item
                         expenditures and a budget narrative.

        (AR at Ex. 1.)

         The solicitation contemplated a Fixed Price Contract. (AR at Ex. 1, § B.2.) Under the terms of
the solicitation, the District would award a single contract to the “responsive and responsible Offeror
whose offer is most advantageous to the District,” (AR at Ex. 1, § M.1) based upon the following
evaluation criteria: (1) Technical Criteria (90 points) (AR at Ex. 1, § M.3.1), and (2) Price Criterion (10
points) (AR at Ex. 1, § M.3.2). “[W]hile the points in the evaluation criteria indicate their relative
importance, the total scores shall not necessarily be determinative of the award. Rather the total scores
shall guide the District in making an intelligent award decision based upon the evaluation criteria.” (AR
at Ex. 1, § M.1.)

        The technical criteria was subdivided into the following four factors:

                   The Offeror demonstrates a well developed plan that details
                    proposed organizational structure, staffing pattern, commitment to
                    clinical competence in treating co-occurring services and an
                    evaluation plan. (40 PTS.)

                   The Offeror demonstrates evidence that the applicant shall develop
                    the project based upon a recovery-based philosophy, active peer
                    involvement and knowledge of the court system. (15 PTS.)

                   The Offeror demonstrated evidence of the ability to link individuals
                    with community-based services, including linage with CSAs as
                    appropriate and enrollment with substance abuse providers when
                    appropriate. (20 Points)

                   The Offeror demonstrates ability to maximize revenue collection. (15
                    Points)

                (AR at Ex. 1, § M.3.1 (emphasis in original).)

Ratings were to be assigned for each technical factor according to the scale below:

  Numeric Rating             Adjective                                Description
        1                      Poor           Marginally meets minimum requirements; major
                                              deficiencies which may be correctable
          2                 Minimally         Marginally meets minimum requirements; minor
                            Acceptable        deficiencies which may be correctable
          3                 Acceptable        Meets requirements; no deficiencies
          4                   Good            Meets requirements and exceeds some requirements; no
                                              deficiencies
          5                  Excellent        Exceeds most, if not all requirements; no deficiencies


                                                     3
                                                                            Psychiatric Institute of Washington, Inc.
                                                                                                    CAB No. P-0905


(AR at Ex. 1, § M.2.1.)

                The technical rating is a weighting mechanism that shall be applied to the
                point value for each evaluation factor to determine the Offeror’s score
                for each factor. The Offeror’s total technical score shall be determined by
                adding the Offeror’s score in each evaluation factor. For example, if an
                evaluation factor has a point value range of twenty (20) points, using the
                Technical Rating Scale above, if the District evaluates the Offeror’s
                response as “Good”, then the score for that evaluation factor is 4/5 of 20
                or 16.

                (AR at Ex. 1, § M.2.2.)

        The price criterion was worth a maximum of ten (10) points and was to be awarded on a purely
objective basis. (AR at Ex. 1, § M.3.2.) “The Offeror with the lowest cost/price shall receive the
maximum price points. All other proposals shall receive a proportionately lower total score.” (Id.)

         The evaluation criteria also allowed for additional preference points to be awarded on the
following bases: (1) DSLBD certified Resident-Owned Business (5 points) (AR at Ex. 1, § M.5.1.2); (2)
DSLBD certified Longtime Resident Business (5 points) (AR at Ex. 1, § M.5.1.3); (3) DSLBD certified
Local Business Enterprise (2 points) (AR at Ex. 1, § M.5.1.4); (4) DSLBD certified Local Business
Enterprise with its principal offices located in an Enterprise Zone (2 points) (AR at Ex. 1, § M.5.1.5); (5)
DSLBD certified Disadvantaged Business Enterprise (2 points) (AR at Ex. 1, § M.5.1.6); (6) DSLBD
certified Veteran-Owned Business (2 points) (AR at Ex. 1, § M.5.1.7); (7) DSLBD certified Local
Manufacturing Business Enterprise (2 points) (AR at Ex. 1, § M.5.1.8). “Notwithstanding the availability
of the preceding preferences, the maximum total preference to which a certified business enterprise is
entitle [sic] under the Act is the equivalent to twelve (12) points on a 100-point scale for proposals
submitted in response to this RFP.” (AR at Ex. 1, § M.5.2.)

        The District reserved its right to award the contract “on the basis of initial offers received,
without discussion.” (AR at Ex. 1, § L.1.2.) However, if the District decided to conduct negotiations

                [a]ll Offerors within the competitive range shall be so notified and shall
                be provided an opportunity to submit written best and final offers at the
                designated date and time. . . . After receipt of best and final offers, no
                discussions shall be reopened unless the Director/ACCO determines that
                it is clearly in the Government’s best interest to do so[.] . . . If
                discussions are reopened, the Director/ACCO shall issue an additional
                request for best and final offers to all Offerors still within the competitive
                range.

                (AR at Ex. 1, § L.17.)

Evaluation of Proposals

       Only two offerors, PIW and Pathways, submitted timely proposals to the RFP. (See AR at Ex. 6,
§ 5.) The Evaluation Committee (“Committee”) met on the seventh, seventeenth, and twenty-first of
November 2011 to review, evaluate and score the submitted proposals. (AR at Ex. 6, § 4.) The
Committee, composed of three members, concluded its initial evaluation of offeror proposals on
December 14, 2011. PIW received raw scores of 69, 37, and 57 from the three respective Committee

                                                      4
                                                                              Psychiatric Institute of Washington, Inc.
                                                                                                      CAB No. P-0905


members for a total score of 163 and an average score of 54.3. (AR at Ex. 6, § 5.1.) Pathways received
raw scores of 73, 65, and 73 for a total score of 211 and an average score of 70.3. (AR at Ex. 6, § 5.1.)

         DMH’s Chief Contracting Officer (“CCO”) issued each offeror a “Notification of Deficiencies”
Best and Final Offer (“BAFO”) request dated December 16, 2011. (AR at Exs. 7, 9.) PIW’s “Notification
of Deficiencies” identified a number of deficiencies under the heading entitled “Price Proposal.” (See AR
at Ex. 7.) Under the “Technical Proposal” caption, the notice also stated:

                 Psychiatric Institute of Washington’s (PIW) proposal lacks detail about
                 peer involvement, peer empowerment. PIW proposal lacks discussion on
                 management data or QI mechanisms. PIW shall provide reason for
                 inability to bill MHRS and discuss in more detail about PIW’s client
                 centered approach.

                 (AR at Ex. 7.)

         BAFOs were due on January 5, 2012. (AR at Exs. 7, 9.) Both offerors submitted BAFOs to the
District. (See AR at Ex. 11, § 5.) The Committee met on January 9, 2012, to review, evaluate and score
the BAFO submissions of both offerors. (AR at Ex. 11, § 4.) Following the BAFO submissions,
Pathways received raw scores of 68, 73, and 73 from the three respective Committee members for a total
score of 214 and an average score of 71.3. (AR at Ex. 11, § 5.2.) PIW received raw scores of 66, 70, and
45 from the three respective Committee members for a total score of 181 and an average score of 60.3.
(AR at Ex. 11, § 5.1.) Pathways’ proposed price for the base year of the contract was $686,356.74;
$238,593.26 less than PIW’s proposed price of $924,950.00. (AR at Ex. 16.) Accordingly, Pathways
received all 10 evaluation points for price; its total evaluation score was 81.33. (Id.) Applying the
solicitation’s objective price formula, PIW was awarded 7.42 evaluation points for price; its total
evaluation score was 67.75. (Id.) In its Evaluation Committee Report, the Committee “unanimously
recommend[ed] the contract be awarded to Pathways to Housing, Inc.” (AR at Ex. 11, § 5.) In the same
report, the Committee then “request[ed] further clarity” on four areas of Pathways’ proposal: (1) the
methodology for billing both MHRS and non-MHRS services; (2) a detailed explanation of the role of
Neighbors Consejo; (3) the plan to hire and retain qualified staff and minimize staff turnover; and (4) the
methodology Pathways would use for in-kind services. (Id.)

         Following the Committee’s recommendation to award the contract to Pathways, on January 12,
2012, the CCO issued Pathways an “Additional Information Request” for “some additional points of
clarification that must be addressed by Pathways to Housing (Pathways) prior to moving forward in the
process.”2 (AR at Ex. 12.) On January 17, 2012, Pathways provided its responses to the CCO’s additional
information request. (AR at Ex. 13.) The CCO met with Pathways on January 18, 2012, and raised
additional questions. (See AR at Ex. 14.) Pathways responded to the District’s questions in writing on
January 23, 2012. (AR at Ex. 14.) “On January 25, 2012, the three member evaluation committee
reconvened to evaluate the responses submitted [by Pathways] to the Court Urgent Care RFP –
Additional Information Request.” (AR at Ex. 15, § 5.) The Committee determined that Pathways’
responses “adequately clarified the concerns of the evaluation committee.” (AR at Ex. 15, § 5.1.)

        On February 1, 2012, the CCO issued a Determination and Findings that (i) Pathways was a
responsible offeror, and (ii) its proposed contract price was fair and reasonable. (AR at Exs. 17, 18.) On

2
 In addition to the four areas of clarification identified by the Committee, the CCO’s letter to Pathways included
one additional item concerning how Pathways would provide a plan to obtain the best qualified individuals to
provide the highest level of service. (AR at Ex. 12.)

                                                        5
                                                                                     Psychiatric Institute of Washington, Inc.
                                                                                                             CAB No. P-0905


the same day, the District notified PIW that it was an unsuccessful offeror and notified Pathways that it
was the successful offeror. (AR at Exs. 19, 20.) PIW requested a debriefing from the District which was
held on February 9, 2012. (Protest ¶ 16.) Subsequently, PIW filed its protest with this Board on February
15, 2012.

Determination and Findings to Proceed with Contract Performance while a Protest is Pending

        On May 16, 2012, the District its first D&F which was executed by DMH’s CCO. The Board
sustained the D&F in an Order dated June 22, 2012. In Wisconsin Avenue Psychiatric Center, Inc. v. D.C.
Department of Mental Health, C.A. No. 005211 B (D.C. Super. Ct. filed June 22, 2012), protester filed a
motion for entry of a temporary restraining order of the Board’s June 22nd Order. On July 3, 2012, the
D.C. Superior Court granted protester’s motion, reversed the Board’s Order, and remanded the case to the
Board. On July 9, 2012, the District filed the Second D&F. The Board vacated its June 22nd Order on
July 12, 2012; the July 9th filing of the Second D&F having rendered moot the May 16th D&F. The Board
also ordered the District to stay execution of the Second D&F until protester had the opportunity to
pursue a challenge of the Second D&F. Protester challenged the Second D&F in a motion dated July 16,
2012.

                                                     DISCUSSION

I.   MOTION TO DISMISS

        On March 9, 2012, the District filed a motion to dismiss in which it argued that the Board should
dismiss the protest because it fails to comply with the requirements of Board Rule 301.1(c). (Mot. to
Dismiss 6-7, Mar. 9, 2012.) Board Rule 301.1 provides in pertinent part:

                   All protests shall be in writing, addressed to the Board, and shall include
                   the following:

                                                     ***
                   (c) a clear and concise statement of the legal and factual grounds of the
                   protest, including copies of relevant documents, and citations to statutes,
                   regulations or solicitation provisions claimed to be violated.

         This rule is “meant to advise protesters of the expected form and content of a protest, so that the
protester identifies the legal and factual grounds of the protest for the Board and the agency and its
counsel.” Unfoldment, Inc., CAB No. P-0435, 44 D.C. Reg. 6378, 6381 (Sept. 12, 1995). “Our
expectation of specificity in the initial protest submission must take into account that the protester may
often have little more than the benefit of the solicitation documentation, its observations as a participant
in the procurement, and a debriefing.” Id.

        While the initial protest raised only a generalized allegation that the District “failed to properly
evaluate [PIW’s and] the awardee’s technical proposal and preference points as provided by the terms of
the RFP,” (Protest ¶¶ 15, 17) the protester has since raised multiple alleged errors with the District’s
evaluation and evaluation process upon which it challenges the present solicitation.3 The District initially
challenged the specificity of protester’s allegations and argued in its motion to dismiss that protester had
3
   In this case, the protester’s later raised bases are intended to supplement its initial argument that the District failed
to properly evaluate the proposals. Under these circumstances, the Board considers the additional arguments as
timely made. See, e.g., Rodgers Bros. Custodial Servs. Inc., CAB No. P-0565, 46 D.C. Reg. 8564, 8566 (Feb. 17,
1999).

                                                             6
                                                                              Psychiatric Institute of Washington, Inc.
                                                                                                      CAB No. P-0905


failed to meet the requirements set forth in Rule 301.1(c).4 We have held that “[w]here the District
believes that a protest ground fails to state a violation of procurement law or regulation or is unsupported
by the facts, the matter should be addressed through the Agency Report on the merits in the first instance
and the absence of detailed facts concerning an alleged procurement deficiency in the initial protest filing
does not necessarily dictate dismissal.” CUP Temporaries, Inc., CAB No. P-0474, 44 D.C. Reg. 6841,
6844 (July 3, 1997). See also Unfoldment, Inc., CAB No. P-0435, 44 D.C. Reg. at 6381. Therefore, based
on a review of the record, the Board finds that the protester’s filings are sufficient to meet the standard
established by Rule 301.1 and the Agency Report has provided the Board with sufficient evidence to rule
on the merits of the claim. Accordingly, the District’s motion to dismiss on the ground that PIW failed to
provide a clear and concise statement of the legal and factual grounds of the protest is denied. The Board
will consider the merits of the protest.

II. MERITS OF THE PROTEST

        We exercise jurisdiction over this protest and its underlying allegations pursuant to D.C. Code §
2-360.03(a)(1) (2011). Protester has standing to file this protest as an aggrieved party because it timely
submitted a proposal in response to the RFP and would be next in line for the award if the protest were
sustained. (AR at Ex. 6, § 5.) Further, PIW timely filed this protest on February 15, 2012, within ten (10)
business days of learning of the basis of the protest, in this case the notice of award to another bidder,
pursuant to D.C. Code § 2-360.08(b)(2) and Board Rule 302.2(b).

         The protester challenges the current award and alleges that (1) the District’s evaluation of the
offeror technical proposals was irrational and therefore flawed and unreasonable, and (2) offerors were
treated unequally in that Pathways was afforded three additional opportunities to correct deficiencies in its
proposal while PIW was not afforded comparable opportunities. (Comments on AR/ Resp. to Mot. to
Dismiss 2, Mar. 27, 2012 [hereinafter “Comments on AR”].)

    Issue One: Was the District’s Evaluation of Both Offeror Technical Proposals Reasonable?

         The protester has alleged that the District failed to evaluate the proposals reasonably and in
accordance with the terms of the solicitation. (Comments on AR 2-15.) PIW therefore contends that its
protest should be sustained because “DMH’s award decision was unreasonable.” (Comments on AR 2.)
However, the District maintains that the respective proposals from PIW and Pathways were properly
evaluated. (Mot. to Reply to the Protester’s Comments on AR/ Resp. to Mot. to Dismiss, & the District’s
Reply 3-4, Apr. 5, 2012.) Upon a review of the record, the Board finds that while there is sufficient
evidence of a reasonable basis for award, there is no evidence that the evaluation conducted by the
Committee deviated from the terms of the solicitation and/or violated procurement law.

         The Board’s standard of review for proposal evaluations and the related selection decision is
whether the District’s actions were reasonable, in accord with the evaluation and selection criteria
identified in the solicitation, and whether there were violations of procurement laws or regulations. See,
Trifax Corp., CAB No. P-0539, 45 D.C. Reg. 8842, 8847 (Sept. 25, 1998); see also Health Right, Inc.,
D.C. Health Coop., Inc., & The George Washington Univ., CAB Nos. P-0507, P-0510, P-0511, 45 D.C.
Reg. 8612, 8630 (Oct. 15, 1997). It is not this Board’s place to make an independent evaluation of offeror
proposals or determine how we might have evaluated proposals were we in the position of the Committee.
See Group Ins. Admin., Inc., CAB No. P-0309-B, 40 D.C. Reg. 4485, 4508 (Sept. 2, 1992) (“[I]t is not

4
  The District has not reasserted its claim that a motion to dismiss is warranted based on Rule 301.1(c) since the
protester filed its Comments on the Agency Report. (Mot. to Reply to the Protester’s Comments on Agency Report,
Apr. 5, 2012.)

                                                        7
                                                                             Psychiatric Institute of Washington, Inc.
                                                                                                     CAB No. P-0905


this Board’s function to evaluate proposals de novo.”) Rather, we only consider whether the District’s
actions were arbitrary. See RGII Tech., Inc., CAB Nos. P-0664, P-0669, P-0670, 50 D.C. Reg. 7475, 7477
(Mar. 6, 2003). “The Board will not interfere with an evaluation decision if, based on the entire record,
the decision is documented in sufficient detail to show that it is not arbitrary and appears reasonable and
in accord with the evaluation criteria listed in the solicitation.” RGII Tech., Inc., CAB Nos. P-0664, P-
0669, P-0670, 50 D.C. Reg. at 7477.

         Accordingly, “[t]he protester has the burden of affirmatively proving its case and the fact that the
protester does not agree with the agency’s technical conclusions does not itself render the evaluation
unreasonable.” Emergency Assocs. of Physician’s Assistants & Nurse Practitioners, Inc., CAB No.P-
0500, 46 D.C. Reg. 8527, 8532 (Dec. 15, 1998). See also O’Donnell Construction Co., CAB No. P-0158
39 D.C. Reg. 4479, 4489 (Mar 24, 1992), wherein the Board held that “[a]bsent a showing that the
District has violated specific provisions of the [Minority Contracting] Act or the PPA or the District’s
procurement regulations, the protest must be denied. This is so because there is a presumption that public
officials perform their official duties properly and in good faith.”

Evaluation of PIW’s Proposal Was Reasonable

         PIW argues that the District failed to properly credit the strength of the staffing offered in PIW’s
proposal and inappropriately used price and cost considerations to downgrade PIW’s technical scores.
(Comments on AR 3, 8.) Specifically, the protester has alleged that the District failed to give appropriate
credit to PIW’s proposal to provide the services of a child and adolescent psychiatrist. (Comments on AR
3.) The record, however, establishes that the District’s evaluation was reasonable with respect to each of
the four technical evaluation criteria, including staffing considerations.

         There is no evidence to support protester’s assertion that PIW’s staffing strengths were
overlooked. Staffing and organizational structure were all evaluated under the first technical evaluation
factor (“Factor 1”), worth a maximum of 40 points. (AR at Ex. 11, § 2.) PIW’s proposal received scores
of 40, 32, and 40, (AR at Ex. 16) which corresponds to receiving two fives and a four under the
solicitation’s rating scale (AR at Ex. 1, § M.2.1). Clearly, the Committee gave PIW’s proposal significant
credit for the strength of its proposed staffing and organizational plan since its proposal received a very
high score for Factor 1.

       Furthermore, the protester has failed to prove that the District was arbitrary in its decision to
award PIW’s proposal lower scores for the other three technical evaluation factors. The Committee’s
summary of its evaluation of PIW’s BAFO stated:

                 [D]id not sufficiently address the deficiencies. The offeror dismissed the
                 need to involve peers even though this was an evaluation criterion. The
                 offeror does not have the ability to bill MHRS and did not offer a plan to
                 maximize revenue collections. The offeror did not sufficiently explain or
                 address the high executive and administrative costs. The raw scores of
                 the offeror’s BAFO from the three (3) committee members were, 66, 70,
                 and 70[5] totaling 181 out of a maximum score of 270. . . . It is noted that
                 a possible 10 points were not included as part of the abovementioned
                 evaluation summary. CPA will utilize Price/Cost formula to calculate

5
 The Board notes the existence of a typographical error in this evaluation narrative written by the Committee. In
particular, PIW’s actual scores were 66, 70, and 45, which is properly reflected in the next paragraph of the
evaluation and totals 181 points overall. (AR at Ex. 11, § 5.1; AR at Ex. 16.)

                                                       8
                                                                             Psychiatric Institute of Washington, Inc.
                                                                                                     CAB No. P-0905


                 cost proposal scores.

                 (AR at Ex. 11, § 5.1.)

         The fourth technical evaluation factor, worth 15 points, exclusively concerned whether the offeror
“demonstrates [an] ability to maximize revenue collection,” (AR at Ex. 1, § M.3.1; AR at Ex. 6, § 2) and
MHRS billing was a key requirement of the solicitation, which related to an offeror’s capacity to bill
Medicaid for reimbursable costs for mental health services. (AR at Ex. 1, § C.7). However PIW’s
proposal did not provide for MHRS billing. Nor did it include peer support services despite solicitation
language which stated that “[t]he applicant must . . . show how these principles will be operationalized
within the project.” (AR at Ex. 1, § C.3.3.) Both of these significant deficiencies were brought to the
attention of PIW in the section under Technical Proposal in the “Notification of Deficiencies” letter. ( AR
at Ex. 7.) However, PIW failed to amend its proposal to address these deficiencies, instead stating in its
BAFO that “[t]he use of peers would not be clinically effective” and that it was currently operating
without MHRS billing services because to do so “would have costs associated with it beyond the scope of
the current contract.” (AR at Ex. 8.)

        Section C.6 of the RFP unambiguously states that “[a]ll Prospective Contractors shall clearly
describe how each of these requirements shall be addressed in the proposal.” (AR at Ex. 1, § C.6.) Yet
PIW’s proposal was nonresponsive to those specific solicitation requirements wherein MHRS billing and
peer involvement were, in fact, within the proposed scope of work. Although PIW was an incumbent
contractor providing UCC services similar to those being sought by the District through the RFP, it was
incumbent upon PIW to respond to the requirements of the present solicitation regardless of how PIW
may have provided similar services under a previous contract. Accordingly, the Committee properly and
reasonably lowered PIW’s scores for failing to address the requirements of the current solicitation.

        There is also no evidence to support PIW’s argument that its low technical scores were actually
the result of the Committee inappropriately considering price factors when scoring technical factors.
Although the Committee noted that the “offeror did not sufficiently explain or address the high executive
and administrative costs,” (AR at Ex. 11, § 5.1) there is no showing that this deficiency affected the
Committee’s scoring of PIW’s proposal because staffing was evaluated under Factor 1 and, as noted
previously, PIW received high scores for Technical Factor 1. (AR at Ex. 16.) In fact, the record shows
that PIW’s scores for Factor 1 increased after the Committee evaluated and scored PIW’s BAFO.

         Further, a review of the Committee reports shows that the Committee used the budgets submitted
by offerors as a means of assessing the practicality of the technical approach proffered by both offerors.
For instance, in assessing PIW’s offer, the Committee noted that “[t]he second CAC position is present in
the organizational chart however does not appear to be included in the budget.” (AR at Ex. 11, § 5.1.)
This inconsistency in the proposal raised concerns over how many CAC positions PIW actually intended
to use to offer substance abuse counseling consistent with the terms of the solicitation, which required
two Certified Abuse Counselors. (AR at Ex. 1, § C.6.1.2; AR at Ex. 11, § 2.) The Committee took the
same approach in assessing Pathways’ proposal noting that “[t]he cost for a Psychiatrist is low. The part-
time psychiatrist will not be able to meet the needs of UCC.” 6 (AR at Ex. 6, § 5.2.) Admittedly, the
solicitation was silent on how the budget would be used in assessing offeror technical proposals. (AR at
Ex. 1, § C.9.1.) However, it appears that the Committee reasonably and uniformly used the budget as a
6
 In fact, PIW asserts that Pathways’ technical evaluation score should have been “downgraded” in light of certain
cost-related deficiencies. (Comments on AR 13-14.) Therefore PIW has argued that the District should consider
price factors in scoring Pathways’ technical proposal even as it claims that its own proposal was improperly
evaluated because the District allegedly used price factors in scoring its technical proposal.


                                                       9
                                                                          Psychiatric Institute of Washington, Inc.
                                                                                                  CAB No. P-0905


means to assess the reliability of both offeror proposals.

Evaluation of Pathways’ Proposal was Reasonable

         Based upon a review of the entire record, the Board finds that protester’s allegation that the
District unreasonably assigned higher scores to Pathways’ proposal is similarly without merit. PIW
claims that the Committee failed to appropriately score Pathways’ proposal for Factor 1. Yet the record
shows that Pathways received scores of 32, 32, and 32 from the Committee. (AR at Ex. 16.) A score of
32 reflects that the panel unanimously felt that Pathways’ proposal warranted a ranking of “Good” or that
it “[m]eets requirements and exceeds some requirements; no deficiencies.” (AR at Ex. 1, § M.2.1.) This
rating refutes protester’s argument that “none of the evaluators scored Pathways any lower for factor # 1,”
(Comments on AR 12) because two of the three evaluators did in fact score Pathways lower than PIW
since PIW received scores of 40, 32, and 40 for Factor 1. A review of the Committee’s report shows that
the Committee noted some areas of concern with respect to the staffing aspects of Pathways’ proposal but
also noted many strengths including that Pathways’ BAFO “clarified the organizational structure and
increased psychiatric time and salary,” and demonstrated that “the licensed clinical staff present
competent [sic] in the area of co-occurring substance abuse treatment.” (AR at Ex. 11.) Given the noted
strengths of Pathways’ proposal which directly relate to the criteria detailed under evaluation Factor 1,
there is no basis upon which the Board can conclude that the Committee’s scoring of Pathways’ proposal
was arbitrary and unreasonable.

         The protester also alleges that the District unreasonably failed to downgrade Pathways’ proposal
with respect to the third subfactor, worth 20 points, which considered offeror capabilities in the area of
substance abuse and related systems. (Comments on AR 14-15.) In support of this allegation, protester
highlights that on January 9, 2012, the Committee evaluated Pathways’ proposal and unanimously
recommended the award to Pathways. Yet, at the same time, the Committee sought clarification on the
role of Neighbors Consejo, specifically:

                What services will Neighbors Consejo provide? Who will provide these
                services and how will the services be reimbursed? What kind of contract
                will be in place between Neighbors Consejo and Pathways?

                (AR at Ex. 11, § 5.)

         PIW contends that this need for clarification evidences that it was “irrational for DMH to evaluate
as a ‘strength’ Pathways’ ‘well discussed’ description regarding the use of its subcontractor.” (Comments
on AR 13.) In its initial proposal, Pathways stated that “Pathways will subcontract with Neighbors to
hire one Spanish speaking Certified Addictions Specialist, as well as a Spanish speaking case aide as part
of the core staffing plan.” (AR at Ex. 5a, at 1.) The proposal further detailed Pathways’ intent to create
two substance abuse counselor positions, both full time – one an employee of Pathways and the other to
be filled through a partnership with Neighbors Consejo. (AR at Ex. 5a, at 3.) In its BAFO, Pathways
then stated “Consistent with the RFP instructions, PTHDC will be hiring two Certified Addiction
Counselors. It is PTHDC’s expectation that each of the Certified Addiction Counselors will spend at least
10 hours per week in the Community to coordinate substance abuse treatment services for those referred
and in need of services.” (AR at Ex. 10, at 4.) Therefore in both its initial proposal and the BAFO,
Pathways was consistent in stating that it was prepared to provide two full time employees to support its
substance abuse program. Accordingly, it was reasonable for the Committee to award Pathways’
proposal high scores in this area even though it requested more detailed information on the scope of
Pathways’ contractual relation with its sub-contractor.



                                                      10
                                                                           Psychiatric Institute of Washington, Inc.
                                                                                                   CAB No. P-0905


Award Decision was Reasonable

         Lastly, the protester alleges that the District failed to conduct an appropriate technical
strengths/price trade off and should “have determined that the additional major strengths of PIW’s
proposal justified the additional cost of the ‘most advantageous,’ best value procurement.” (Comments
on AR 18.) While the protester is correct that the terms of the solicitation called for the District to award
a contract “to the responsive and responsible Offeror whose offer is most advantageous to the District,”
(AR at Ex. 1, § M.1) its argument that the District failed to recognize PIW’s proposal as the most
advantageous despite its significantly higher cost is illogical. The record shows that PIW failed to
comply with key requirements of the solicitation. PIW’s staffing strengths did not overcome its major
technical deficiencies, as noted by the Committee, in other aspects of its proposal. Accordingly, the
Committee properly awarded PIW’s proposal lower scores for some technical evaluation factors. (AR at
Ex. 16.) Ultimately, after the BAFOs were submitted, evaluated, and scored, PIW’s offer had a lower
technical and price score than Pathways’, (AR at Ex. 16) while Pathways’ proposal offered a better
technical product at a lower price, according to the terms of the solicitation. (Id.). Therefore, the District
acted reasonably in making its best value procurement decision when it chose to award the contract to the
offeror that submitted the best technical proposal at the lowest cost to the District.

      Issue Two: Did the District Treat the Offerors Unequally and Thereby Act Unlawfully?

         The protester alleges that the District failed to engage in meaningful discussions during
negotiations and treated the offerors unequally by allowing Pathways additional opportunities to engage
in discussions. (Comments on AR 5, 15.) Specifically, protester noted that the District failed to inform
PIW of certain proposal weaknesses including, that (i) PIW was not DMH certified, and (ii) the referral
system seemed complicated to evaluators. (Comments on AR 6.) The protester also alleges that the
District treated offerors unequally by allowing Pathways “at least three opportunities after it submitted its
BAFO to address DMH’s remaining concerns, including serious concerns regarding Pathways’
organization and staffing.” (Comments on AR 15.) The protester claims that this resulted in prejudice
because “PIW’s scores would have been higher had PIW been given the same chance as Pathways to
address all of the deficiencies noted in its initial proposal.” (Comments on AR 9.)

        “The District’s procurement regulations require that the contracting officer point out deficiencies
in proposals, resolve uncertainties and mistakes in proposals, and allow all offerors an opportunity to
supplement or revise proposals.” Med. Extension Servs., Inc., CAB No. P-0378, 41 D.C. Reg. 3918, 3921
(Jan. 14, 1994). Specifically, the District’s procurement regulations provide that during negotiations,
discussions must:

                                                    ***
                (b) Advise the offeror of deficiencies in its proposal so that the offeror is
                    given an opportunity to satisfy the District’s requirements;
                (c) Attempt to resolve any uncertainties concerning the technical
                    proposal and other terms and conditions of the proposal;
                (d) Resolve any suspected mistakes by calling them to the offeror’s
                    attention as specifically as possible without disclosing information
                    concerning the other offerors’ proposals or the evaluation process;
                    and
                (e) Provide the offeror a reasonable opportunity to submit any cost or
                    price, technical or other revisions to its proposal that may result from
                    discussions.



                                                     11
                                                                               Psychiatric Institute of Washington, Inc.
                                                                                                       CAB No. P-0905


                 D.C. Mun. Regs. tit. 27, § 1621.2.

        The District opened discussions with both offerors on December 16, 2011.7 (See AR at Exs. 7, 9.)
In the “Notification of Deficiencies” and request for BAFO sent to PIW, the District stated:

                 Psychiatric Institute of Washington’s (PIW) proposal lacks detail about
                 peer involvement, peer empowerment. PIW proposal lacks discussion on
                 management data or QI mechanisms. PIW shall provide reason for
                 inability to bill MHRS and discuss in more detail about PIW’s client
                 centered approach.

                 (AR at Ex. 7.)

        PIW claims that it was prejudiced by “DMH’s failure to disclose all its evaluated deficiencies in
PIW’s initial proposal” including that PIW was “not DMH certified” and that “the referral system seems
complicated.” (Comments on AR 6.) However, consistent with the procurement regulations, the District
made PIW aware of the significant weaknesses in its proposal that had an adverse impact on the
proposal’s technical rating, and there is no evidence that the particular deficiencies alluded to by PIW
carried any significant weight such that overcoming them could have enabled PIW to reverse its
considerable scoring disadvantage. It bears mentioning again that the District directed PIW to discuss
peer involvement, a significant subfactor of the second technical evaluation factor, and billing issues,
which were highly relevant to the fourth technical evaluation factor. Yet, despite the District’s directive
to address those proposal deficiencies, PIW failed to revise its proposal to answer those concerns and
instead disputed the solicitation requirement for peer involvement and declared that to use the required
MHRS billing would result in costs “beyond the scope of the current contract.” (See AR at Ex. 8.) Under
these circumstances, it was reasonable for the committee to have given PIW lower technical evaluation
scores.

         The “contracting officer shall not assist an offeror to bring its proposal up to the level of other
proposals through successive rounds of discussion, such as pointing out weaknesses resulting from the
offeror’s lack of diligence, competence, or inventiveness in preparing the proposal.” D.C. Mun. Regs. tit
27, § 1621.3. Accordingly, this Board has held that “[a]gencies are required to discuss weaknesses in an
offeror’s proposal where the weaknesses have a significant adverse impact on the proposal’s technical
rating.” Health Right, Inc., D.C. Health Coop., Inc., & The George Washington Univ., CAB Nos. P-
0507, P-0510, P-0511, 45 D.C. Reg. at 8645. But “[a]gencies need not afford offerors all-encompassing
discussions, or discuss every element of a technically acceptable proposal that received less than the
possible maximum rating; rather agencies need only lead offerors into the areas of their proposal which
require amplification.” Koba Assocs., Inc., CAB No. P-0350, 41 D.C. Reg. 3446, 3472 (June 16, 1993)
(citing Signal Corp., B-241849.2, B-241849.3, 91-1 CPD ¶ 218 (Feb. 26, 1991)).

        On January 9, 2012, the Committee unanimously recommended the contract award to Pathways.
(AR at Ex. 11, § 5.) The CCO followed up with a January 12th letter to Pathways seeking clarification on
(1) the methodology for billing both MHRS and non-MHRS services; (2) the role of subcontractor
Neighbors Consejo; (3) the plan to minimize staff turnover; (4) the methodology to provide in-kind
services; and (5) the plan to obtain qualified individuals to provide quality service. (AR at Ex. 12.) On
January 17th, Pathways provided additional responses. (AR at Ex. 13.) The CCO then met with Pathways
7
  Pursuant to RFP section L.17 entitled “Best and Final Offers”, which required the District to issue BAFO requests
“to all Offerors still within the competitive range,” (AR at Ex. 1, § L.17) the District issued both offerors a
“Notification of Deficiencies” request for BAFO (AR at Exs. 7, 9).


                                                        12
                                                                                 Psychiatric Institute of Washington, Inc.
                                                                                                         CAB No. P-0905


on January 18th and raised additional questions. (AR at Ex. 14.) Pathways’ response to the additional
information request was submitted on January 23rd. (AR at Ex. 14.) On January 25th, the Committee
again recommended unanimously that the contract be awarded to Pathways. (AR at Ex. 15, § 5.1.)

         The protester alleges that had it been given additional opportunities to submit clarifications, it
could have raised its score. However, in its BAFO submission the protester was clearly nonresponsive to
specific requirements of the RFP despite the fact that the Committee explicitly raised many of these
deficiencies with the protester prior to its BAFO submission. (AR at Ex. 8.) Thus, the record shows that
after the Committee evaluated and scored the BAFOs of both offerors, it reasonably recommended that
award be made to Pathways because it ultimately received the highest evaluation score. At no time
thereafter was Pathways proposal rescored by the Committee. (AR at Exs. 15, 16.) Instead, the CCO
entered into negotiations with Pathways pursuant to section 2-354.03 (h)(1)and (2) of the D.C. Code
which permits a contracting officer to enter into negotiations with the highest-ranked offeror. The
statutory provision states:

               (h)(1) After ranking the prospective contractors, the contracting officer may elect
                      to proceed with negotiations in accordance with paragraph (2) of this
                      subsection. The contracting officer’s decision shall not be subject to
                      review.
                 (2) If the contracting officer elects to proceed with negotiations, the
                      contracting officer shall negotiate with the highest-ranked prospective
                      contractor on price or matters affecting the scope of the contract, so long as
                      the terms of the final contract are within the scope of the request for
                      proposals.

               D.C. Code § 2-354.03.

         Accordingly, the Board views the CCO’s request for the referenced clarifications from Pathways
as part of the overall process of commencing negotiations with the highest ranked offeror.8 Therefore,
notwithstanding the protester’s allegation that the District treated offerors unequally when it sought
answers to several questions despite having made the decision to award the contract to Pathways, the
District acted lawfully and consistent with the relevant statutory provision. The Board finds that the
District’s actions were reasonable, in accord with the evaluation and selection criteria identified in the
solicitation, and that there is no evidence in the record of any violations of procurement laws or
regulations in the conduct of this solicitation. For these reasons, the protest is denied.

III. SECOND D&F

         In light of the Board’s preceding discussion denying the protest on the merits, the protester’s
motion challenging the Second D&F is also denied as moot. However, the protester has raised an issue
related to the Second D&F that warrants further discussion herein.

        The protester contends that the Second D&F was unlawfully executed by DMH’s CCO instead of
the District’s Chief Procurement Officer. (Mot. to Challenge Dep’t of Mental Health Director’s Revised
Determination to Proceed with Performance § I, July 16, 2012.) The Procurement Practices Reform Act
8
  Under D.C. Code § 2-351.04(41), negotiations are defined as “discussions to determine the terms and conditions of
a contract or procurement.” Hence, the discussions between the CCO and Pathways following the recommendation
to award the contract to Pathways serve to clarify that Pathways’ proposed services are consistent with the
requirements of the RFP and such discussions are appropriate as long as the terms of the final contract are within the
scope of the RFP. D.C. Code § 2-354.03(h)(2).

                                                         13
                                                                                Psychiatric Institute of Washington, Inc.
                                                                                                        CAB No. P-0905


of 2010 (“PPRA”) provides:

                 Performance under a protested procurement may proceed, or award may
                 be made, while a protest is pending only if the CPO makes a
                 determination, supported by substantial evidence, that urgent and
                 compelling circumstances that significantly affect interests of the District
                 will not permit waiting for the decision of the Board concerning the
                 protest.

                 D.C. Code § 2-360.08(c)(2).

         In this regard, the Board has previously opined on this staturoty requirement that the CPO must
execute any formal determination that urgent and compelling circumstances exist such that a contract
award cannot be stayed during the pendency of a protest before our Board. Specifically, in Arrow
Construction, Co., LLC, CAB No. P-0692, 52 D.C. Reg. 4233, 4234 (Oct. 6, 2004), the Board noted that
the “[District of Columbia Public Schools] Chief Procurement Officer did not have the power to prepare
the written determination” required by this section of the code. In Arrow, the Board held that D.C. Code
§ 2-309.08(c)(2)9 “required the Chief Procurement Officer (CPO) of the District of Columbia to make a
written determination.” Arrow Constr., Co., LLC, CAB No. P-0692, 52 D.C. Reg. at 4234. However, this
same principle cannot be applied in this case as it relates to DMH. Under the PPRA, DMH’s chief
procurement officer has the express authority to exercise CPO authority, at least until October 1, 2015.
The PPRA provides:

                 [U]ntil October 1, 2015, the following agencies, through their chief
                 procurement officers, shall exercise the duties of the CPO for their
                 respective agencies:

                                                ***
                 (B) The Department of Mental Health[10]

                 D.C. Code § 2-352.01(a)(3).

        The Second D&F was executed by the CCO who is the chief procurement officer for DMH.
Accordingly, the Second D&F was issued by the appropriate District contracting authority. And although
moot, the Board finds it helpful to clarify for the protester’s benefit, the actual procurement authority of
DMH’s CCO under law.

                                                 CONCLUSION

        In conclusion, the Board finds that the protester has not met its burden of proof to establish that
the District acted unreasonably, in violation of procurement law or regulation, or inconsistently with the

9
  This statutory provision has since been repealed; however, an identical provision is now codified in D.C. Code § 2-
360.08(c)(2) (2011).
10
   The entire section provides “The Department of Mental Health, if a court order no longer requires the agency to
be exempt from the CPO’s authority.” D.C. Code § 2-352.01(a)(3)(B). The D.C. Council’s final report on the
PPRA indicates that this language refers to the fact the DMH is currently operating under a court order that
specifically requires it to be exempt from CPO authority. Accordingly, the D.C. Council anticipated that, by Fiscal
Year 2016 at the earliest, DMH may be moved under the District CPO’s authority. However, the D.C. Council also
contemplated that DMH’s authorization to exercise CPO duties could extend beyond October 1, 2015. Rep. on Bill
18-610, the “Procurement Practices Reform Act of 2010” Attach. I. (Oct. 21, 2010).

                                                         14
                                                                      Psychiatric Institute of Washington, Inc.
                                                                                              CAB No. P-0905


evaluation and selection criteria set forth in the RFP. Accordingly, the protest is denied. Protester’s
motion to override the Second D&F is also denied as moot.

        SO ORDERED.


DATED: August 1, 2012                                  /s/ Maxine E. McBean
                                                       MAXINE E. MCBEAN
                                                       Administrative Judge

CONCURRING:

/s/ Marc D. Loud, Sr.
MARC D. LOUD, SR.
Chief Administrative Judge

/s/ Monica S. Parchment
MONICA S. PARCHMENT
Administrative Judge


Electronic Service:

Jeffrey Weinstein, Esq.
Jeffrey Weinstein, PLLC
4545 Connecticut Ave, N.W.
Suite 929
Washington, D.C. 20008


Janice Skipper, Esq.
Assistant Attorney General
Office of the Attorney General
441 4th Street, N.W., 7th Floor South
Washington, D.C. 20001




                                                  15
