               DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD

PROTEST OF:

SEAGRAVE FIRE APPARATUS, LLC                      )
                                                  )   CAB No. P-0928
Solicitation No: DCFB-2011-R-0093A&B              )

       For the Protester: A. Joseph Neiner; pro se. For the District of Columbia: Talia Sassoon
Cohen, Esq., Assistant Attorney General.

      Opinion by Administrative Judge Monica C. Parchment with Chief Administrative Judge
Marc D. Loud, Sr., and Administrative Judge Maxine E. McBean concurring.

                               ORDER DISMISSING PROTEST
                                         Filing ID #48536195


        The protester, Seagrave Fire Apparatus, LLC (“Seagrave”), challenges the District’s
decision to reject its proposal from receiving the contract award for allegedly not offering to
meet the Solicitation’s warranty requirements. In response to the protest, the District timely filed
an Agency Report in this matter contending that the rejection of the protester’s offer was proper
because it was noncompliant in failing to meet the mandatory warranty requirements in the
Solicitation. The protester has repeatedly failed to refute the assertions in the Agency Report
that its proposal was properly rejected for being noncompliant after having been given two
opportunities by the Board to further respond to these matters. Moreover, the protester
seemingly concedes in its initial protest filing that its proposal did not offer to meet the
Solicitation’s warranty requirement.

        Consequently, based upon the protester’s failure to prosecute this matter beyond the
filing of the initial protest, coupled with the fact that the protester also has not refuted the
assertions made in the Agency Report, the Board hereby closes the record in this matter and
dismisses the present protest.

                                          DISCUSSION

        Seagrave filed the present action on October 5, 2012, challenging the District’s
determination that its proposal was technically unacceptable for award because it did not meet
the product warranty requirements in the subject Solicitation. (Protest 2-4.) By way of
background, Solicitation No. DCFB-2011-R-0093A&B (the “Solicitation”) was issued on behalf
of the District of Columbia Fire and Emergency Services agency (“FEMS”) seeking a
contactor(s) to provide Pumper and Aerial Trucks to FEMS according to specifications set forth
in the Solicitation. (Agency Report (“AR”) 2.) The District utilized a two-step bidding process
under the Solicitation whereby the District first evaluated initial proposals and then subsequently
requested that offerors submit a second sealed priced bid for further evaluation, if their initial
proposal was determined to be acceptable. (Id.) The protester responded to the Solicitation with
an offer to provide the District with the required Aerial Trucks which was later rejected for
award. (Id. at 3-5.)
                                                                                      Seagrave Fire Apparatus, LLC
                                                                                                   CAB No. P-0928

         The protester contends in its protest that, before the ultimate rejection of its proposal, it
was originally notified by the District that it had received the contract award after completion of
the two-step Solicitation process. (Protest 3.) The protester expressly requests reinstatement of
that alleged original award decision. (Id. at 4.) Nonetheless, the protester effectively appears to
concede in its protest that its proposal did not meet the Solicitation’s extended warranty
requirement by noting that it subsequently advised the District that it would “pick up the
[warranty] coverage” through a September 24, 2012, letter to the District, after the submission of
its original proposal. (Id. at 4.)

        In response to the protest, on October 31, 2012, the District filed its Agency Report under
seal due to the governing protective order in this case which does not allow the unrepresented
protester to have access to the District’s confidential source selection information related to this
procurement. The District also provided the protester with notice that it had filed the Agency
Report on October 31, 2012. The Agency Report contends that the District’s ultimate decision to
exclude the protester from receiving the contract award was reasonably based upon the fact that
the protester’s proposal took exception to, and did not comply with, the five-year warranty
requirement. (AR 5-6.)

        The District further asserts that, due to a minor administrative error, the protester was
erroneously notified that it had received the contract award although the agency had not yet
received authorization from the Office of the Attorney General (“OAG”) and the District of
Columbia Council to award the contract to any company.1 (Id. at 4 n.2.) Additionally, the
District contends that the protester’s proposal should have been formally rejected for award,
before the second bidding phase, because of its noncompliance with the Solicitation’s warranty
requirements, although this did not occur because of some other administrative error that
occurred within the agency during the bidding process.2 (Id. at 3-4.)

        Board Rule 307.1 requires a protester to file comments within seven business days in
response to an agency report filed with the Board in a protest. The protester, however, did not
file any comments or response to the October 31, 2012, Agency Report with the Board within
this required timeframe. Nevertheless, on November 15, 2012, the Board ordered the District to
file a public redacted version of its Agency Report by November 19, 2012, and to provide the
protester with a copy of the same. (Nov. 15, 2012, Sua Sponte Order.) The Board’s Order
further directed the protester to file its comments to the public redacted version of the Agency
Report, if any, by November 30, 2012. (Id.) This was the protester’s second opportunity to
respond to the District’s Agency Report beyond the original deadline of November 9, 2012, for
the protester’s comments.

1
   In particular, the District’s Agency Report represents that due to an administrative error, the District’s contract
specialist, through the District’s electronic procurement system, issued an automatic email notifying the protester
that it had been awarded the contract. (AR 4 n.2.) However, because the subject procurement is valued above $1
million, the proposed contract required a legal sufficiency review and approval by the OAG and the Council before
the District could issue a formal award notification to any company. At the time of the filing of this Agency Report,
the District represented that the OAG had not approved the proposed award to any offeror and, thus, the District
asserts that the original notice of award was issued to Seagrave in error. (Id.)
2
  The evaluation record in this matter is consistent with the District’s statement that the protester’s proposal was
immediately identified by the District as being noncompliant with the Solicitation’s warranty requirement. (AR Ex.
3.)


                                                        -2-
                                                                                       Seagrave Fire Apparatus, LLC
                                                                                                    CAB No. P-0928

        The District ultimately filed a publicly available redacted version of the Agency Report
on November 26, 2012, that was made available to the protester on this same date.3 The
protester, however, for the second time, failed to file any comments or response to the redacted
Agency Report by November 30, 2012, as ordered by the Board. Additionally, as of the date of
the issuance of the present Order, the protester has failed to file any comments although over
three weeks have passed since the redacted Agency Report was made available to the protester
on November 26, 2012.

        Under the Board’s rules, upon the protester’s failure to file comments to an Agency
Report filed in a protest, or to file a statement requesting that the case be decided on the record,
or to request an extension of time for filing, it shall result in the closing of the record for the case
and may also result in dismissal of the protest. Board Rule 307.3. Further, when the protester
fails to file comments on the Agency Report, and the facts in the Agency Report are not
otherwise contradicted by the protest, the Board may treat the factual allegations in the Agency
Report as conceded by the protester. Board Rule 307.4. Given that the protester has failed twice
to respond to the Agency Report to contradict the District’s assertions, the Board hereby closes
the record in this matter pursuant to Board Rule 307.3, as it relates to the protester’s original
protest allegations and the District’s response thereto.

        Moreover, by repeatedly not filing a response to the Agency Report, the protester has in
no way contradicted the District’s assertion in the Agency Report that its proposal did not
comply with the Solicitation’s warranty requirements and was, therefore, properly deemed
unacceptable for award by the District. Additionally, as noted above, Seagrave, in its initial
protest, in at least one instance, seems to admit that it did not meet the Solicitation’s warranty
requirements.4 Thus, in light of the protester’s failure to even attempt to further refute the
District’s evidence that its proposal was noncompliant, the Board treats these facts in the Agency
Report as conceded by the protester.5

       The protester has, however, filed a rather vague challenge to the District’s recently filed
Determination and Findings to Proceed with Contract Award while Protest is Pending (“D&F”)
pursuant to D.C. CODE § 2-360.08(c).6 The District contends in this document that it is
necessary for the agency to proceed immediately with the performance of the present contract for
Aerial and Pumper Trucks to update, and supplement, its aging fleet of vehicles to ensure the
3
  The District filed proposed redactions to the Agency Report for public release, under seal, on November 21, 2012,
for the Board’s approval. A final publicly available version of this same redacted document was filed on November
26, 2012, by the District, after the Board’s approval, and was made publicly available to the protester on this same
date by service through the Board’s Lexis/Nexis electronic filing system.
4
  The pre-award evaluation record also includes correspondences from Seagrave, in response to the District’s inquiry
requesting more details about the extent of its proposed warranty coverage, confirming that Seagrave’s proposed
extended five year limited warranty would not cover any component parts once the component parts warranty
expired. (AR Ex. 5.) In this regard, Seagrave provided the example of Meritor axles on its proposed Aerial Trucks,
which would not have a warranty beyond two years. (Id.)
5
  The Board also accepts as conceded by the protester the District’s assertion in the Agency Report that, due to an
administrative internal error within the agency, the protester was erroneously notified that it had received the
contract award before any award decision had been approved by the OAG or Council.
6
  The Board notes that the D&F only discusses the District’s urgent need to proceed with the contract performance
as it relates to the Aerial Truck portion of the contract presumably because the protester only offered to provide this
particular equipment, and not the additional Pumper Trucks that could also be offered under the Solicitation at the
offeror’s option. (See D&F 1.)


                                                         -3-
                                                                          Seagrave Fire Apparatus, LLC
                                                                                       CAB No. P-0928

reliability and continuity of fire and emergency medical services that are provided to city
residents by the District through the use of these vehicles. (D&F 2-3.) The protester’s primary
objection to the D&F seems to be its belief that it “nullifies” the protest process at the Board,
along with its somewhat confusing assertion that certain dates in the D&F are contrary to the
dates in certain exhibits. (Protester’s Challenge to D&F.) Nonetheless, by virtue of the
explanations included in the D&F, the Board finds that the District has provided substantial
evidence of its need to ensure the provision of reliable fire and emergency services, which
necessarily requires the periodic, and now immediate, replacement of aging FEMS vehicles
under the disputed contract, and that this is an urgent and compelling basis to proceed with its
immediate performance.

        Accordingly, in light of the factors discussed herein, the protest is dismissed for failure to
prosecute this action by the protester beyond the initial filing of its protest. The Board, further,
finds that the D&F decision was proper for the reasons set forth herein although this D&F issue
is effectively rendered moot by this order of dismissal.


SO ORDERED.


Date: December 20, 2012                                       /s/ Monica C. Parchment
                                                              MONICA C. PARCHMENT
                                                              Administrative Judge
CONCURRING:

/s/ Marc D. Loud, Sr.                                         /s/ Maxine E. McBean
MARC D. LOUD, SR.                                             MAXINE E. MCBEAN
Chief Administrative Judge                                    Administrative Judge


Electronic Service:

A. Joseph Neiner
Chairman & CEO
Seagrave Fire Apparatus, LLC
105 East 12th Street
Clintonville, WI 54929

Talia Sassoon Cohen, Esq.
Assistant Attorney General
Office of the Attorney General
441 4th Street, N.W., Suite 700 S
Washington, D.C. 20001




                                                 -4-
