 
 

               DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD

PROTEST OF:

TRILLIAN TECHNOLOGIES, LLC                            )
                                                      )              CAB No. P-0946
Solicitation No. 105096                               )

                               ORDER DISMISSING PROTEST
                                        Filing ID 53968394

        Before the Board is the District’s request for dismissal of the present protest based upon
its decision to take corrective action in response to the protest allegations. (Dist. Mot. to Dismiss
1.) The present protest alleges that the terms of the subject solicitation are overly restrictive and
improper because they only permit offerors to propose one type of Vendor Management System
(VMS) product, Peoplefluent, to meet the contract’s Information Technology Staff
Augmentation (ITSA) service requirements. (Protest 4.) Subsequently, on August 7, 2013, the
District advised the Board that it was taking corrective action in response to this protest by
cancelling the solicitation, and reevaluating the statement of work. (Dist. Notice of Corrective
Action 1.) Further, the District represents that it intends to advertise a new solicitation in the
future including its new requirement. (Id.) Thus, the District filed the present motion based
upon its contention that the foregoing corrective action plan renders the protest allegations moot.

        The protester opposes the present motion to dismiss on the grounds that the District’s
proposed corrective action does not explicitly specify what the terms of the new contract
requirements will be, and whether they will be materially different from the terms of the
protested solicitation. (Protester’s Opp’n to Dist. Mot. to Dismiss 1-2.) The Board, however,
finds that, by cancelling the very solicitation which the protester alleged was improper in its
terms, the District effectively mooted the protest grounds raised in this action and the matter is
now ripe for disposition. See Williams, Adley & Co., LLP, CAB Nos. P-0666, P-0667, 50 D.C.
Reg. 7488 (Apr. 14, 2003) wherein the Board held that “the protesters can raise appropriate
protest grounds under the new solicitation and awards and there is no good reason to address
issues where the underlying solicitation has been cancelled.” Accordingly, any new allegations
by the protester arising from the District’s future solicitation for these same services must be
asserted at that time as a new ground of protest with the Board. Id.

       The present protest is DISMISSED.

SO ORDERED.

Date: August 30, 2013                                 /s/ Monica C. Parchment
                                                      MONICA C. PARCHMENT
                                                      Administrative Judge
                             -2-                      Trillian Technologies, LLC
                                                                CAB No. P-0946
                               

CONCURRING:

/s/ Maxine E. McBean
Administrative Judge




ELECTRONIC SERVICE TO:

Mr. Howard A. Toorie               Robert Schildkraut, Esq.
Trillian Technologies, LLC         Assistant Attorney General
739 Girard Street, N.W.            441 4th Street, N.W., 7th Floor
Washington, D.C. 20001             Washington, D.C. 20001




                             -2-
 
