                    GOVERNMENT OF THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA
                          CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD

PROTEST OF:

PHOENIX CAPITAL PARTNERS, LLC                        )
                                                     )           CAB No. P-0938
                                                     )
Solicitation No. CFOPD-13-RFQ-025                    )


       For the Protester, Phoenix Capital Partners, LLC: Edward J. Tolchin, Ira E. Hoffman;
Offit Kurman, P.A. For the District of Columbia, Office of the Chief Financial Officer: Robert
Schildkraut, Jody Harrington; Office of the Attorney General.

      Opinion by Administrative Judge Monica C. Parchment with Administrative Judge
Maxine E. McBean concurring.

                                               OPINION
                                            Filing ID 54008345

        This protest arises from the District of Columbia Office of the Chief Financial Officer
(“OCFO”) contracting officer’s refusal to consider a Statement of Qualifications (“SOQ”)
submitted 24 minutes after the submission deadline by the Phoenix Capital Partners, LLC
(“Phoenix”) in response to Request for Qualifications No. CFOPD-13-RFQ-025 (the “RFQ”).
The protester contends that the OCFO should have considered its SOQ despite its late
submission. The OCFO maintains that the contracting officer properly rejected Phoenix’s SOQ
as late. For the reasons set forth herein, we deny the protest.

                                    FACTUAL BACKGROUND

         The Office of Contracts of the OCFO issued Request for Qualifications No. CFOPD-13-
RFQ-025 on April 25, 2013, in an effort to prequalify prospective contractors for future
procurements of financial advisory services on behalf of the Office of Finance and Treasury.
(Agency Report (“AR”) Ex. 2, at 1-3.) The RFQ sought to prequalify prospective contractors in
four different categories of financial advisory services.1 (Id. ¶¶ B.1.1, C.1, C.2.) Along these
lines, the RFQ provided detailed requirements that any prequalified vendor would be expected to
meet for each of the four categories of services. (See generally id. ¶¶ C.3.1-C.3.4.) The RFQ
made clear, however, that prequalification alone would not commit the OCFO to purchase any
quantity of services from a vendor. (Id. ¶¶ B.2.3, B.2.5.) Rather, the OCFO would acquire
services through subsequent procurements, participation in which would be limited to
prequalified vendors. (Id. ¶¶ B.2.2, B.2.4.)


1
 The four categories listed in the RFQ were: (1) Debt Obligations; (2) Economic Development Financings; (3)
Management of Real Property, Economic Development and Other Financing Programs; and (4) General Advisory
Services. (AR Ex. 2 ¶ C.1.2.)
                                                                                         Phoenix Capital Partners, LLC
                                                                                                      CAB No. P-0938

        The RFQ directed vendors to submit technical proposals in response to the RFQ that
identified the categories of services for which the vendor was seeking prequalification. (Id. ¶¶
L.3.2, L.3.3.1.) The RFQ also specified that offerors that submitted technical proposals were
required to meet the specific technical criteria set forth in Section M of the RFQ. (Id. ¶¶ L.3.3.2,
M.3.1.) The initial cover page to the RFQ stated that responses would be received by the District
until 2:00 p.m. on May 16, 2013. (Id. at 1.) The delivery instructions for proposals in response
to the RFQ further stated that responses were due “not later than proposal due date as specified
on page 1 of this solicitation or as amended.” (Id. ¶ L.12.2.C (emphasis in original).)
Additionally, under the express terms of the RFQ, the District would not consider a late proposal
unless one of three exceptions applied. (Id. ¶¶ L.8.1, L.8.3.)2 The OCFO amended the RFQ
twice; however, neither of those amendments modified the May 16, 2013, submission deadline.
(See generally AR Ex. 3.)

        Phoenix submitted its SOQ in response to the RFQ at 2:24 p.m. on May 16, 2013 -- 24
minutes after the submission deadline. (AR Ex. 5.) On May 23, 2013, the OCFO contracting
officer informed Phoenix that the District would not consider its SOQ because it was submitted
after the submission deadline. (AR Ex. 4 ¶ 9.) Phoenix timely protested the OCFO’s refusal to
consider its submission by filing the present protest with the Board on May 31, 2013.

         Contentions of the Parties

        Phoenix does not dispute that it submitted its SOQ after the submission deadline, nor
does Phoenix argue that the late submission was caused by some act on the part of the OCFO.
(See Protest 2 (“Phoenix was inadvertently delayed in delivering its SOQ.”).) Instead, Phoenix
maintains that the OCFO should have considered its SOQ despite its late submission. Phoenix
argues that the RFQ late proposal provisions as well as the District’s procurement regulations
governing the rejection of late bids and proposals are inapplicable to this case because an SOQ is
neither a bid nor a proposal for a contract award. (Protester Comments 1-7; Protest 3.) Phoenix
further argues that the OCFO is not bound by the late proposal regulations, promulgated by the
District’s Chief Procurement Officer (“CPO”), because the OCFO is not subject to the CPO’s
authority. (Id.) Phoenix also contends that principles of law and equity require that the OCFO
consider its SOQ to satisfy the mandate for full and open competition. (Id. at 4.)3

       The District, on the other hand, asserts that even though the OCFO is exempt from the
CPO’s authority, the OCFO is not exempt from the CPO’s procurement regulations, including
those concerning late proposals. (AR 3-4.) The District further argues that the late proposal
provisions in the RFQ apply to preclude acceptance of Phoenix’s late SOQ. (Id. at 4-5.) The

2
  The exceptions for accepting a late proposal included: 1) the proposal was sent by registered or certified mail not
later than the 5th calendar day before the date specified for receipt of proposals; 2) the proposal was sent by mail and
it is determined by the contracting officer that the late receipt at the location specified in the solicitation was caused
by mishandling by the District; or 3) the proposal was the only proposal received. (Id.) None of the foregoing
exceptions have been cited by the protester, or recognized by the Board, as applying to the underlying facts in the
present case.
3
   Phoenix also argues that the RFQ did not provide a firm closing date for receipt of responses. (Protester
Comments 1-2.)




                                                          -2-
                                                                                    Phoenix Capital Partners, LLC
                                                                                                 CAB No. P-0938

District also contends that principles of law and equity mandate rejection of Phoenix’s late SOQ
in order to protect the integrity of the procurement process. (Id. at 5-6.)

                                                DISCUSSION

       The Board exercises jurisdiction over the present protest matter pursuant to D.C. CODE §
2-360.03(a)(1) (2011).

        The central issue in this protest primarily concerns whether the District violated
procurement law or regulation by improperly refusing to accept the protester’s SOQ, which was
submitted late, since the SOQ is not a formal proposal for a contract award.4 In this regard, and
as noted above, the protester principally argues that there was no requirement in the RFQ, or any
applicable law, that precluded the District from accepting its SOQ even though it was delivered
after the submission deadline.

        In addressing the protester’s contentions, we first look to the terms of the RFQ to
determine whether any express submission deadline provisions are contained therein. We have
recognized in our earlier decisions that where the protester and the contracting agency disagree
as to the meaning of solicitation provisions, the Board will interpret the solicitation as a whole
and in a manner so as to give effect to all of its provisions. See Koba Assocs., Inc., CAB No. P-
350, 41 D.C. Reg. 3446, 3470 (June 16, 1993); NCS Techs., Inc., B-406306.3, 2012 CPD ¶ 259
at 3 (Sept. 17, 2012); Colt Def., LLC, B-406696, 2012 CPD ¶ 302 at 7 (July 24, 2012).
Accordingly, the same contract interpretation principle must apply in analyzing the parties’
disagreement over the existence of any applicable submission deadline provisions that may be
present in the RFQ given that its terms and conditions for offerors are very comparable to those
of a solicitation for a contract award.

        Here, the cover page (page 1) to the RFQ unequivocally states that responses to the RFQ
would be received by the District until 2:00 p.m. on May 16, 2013. (AR Ex. 2, at 1.) Similarly,
the supplemental delivery instructions for proposals in response to the RFQ further stated that
responses were due “not later than proposal due date as specified on page 1 of this solicitation or
as amended.” (Id. ¶ L.12.2.C (emphasis in original).) The RFQ further stated that it would not
consider proposals submitted after the submission deadline unless a specific exception applied.
(Id. ¶¶ L.8.1, L.8.3.)

         Thus, it is fairly evident that all of the foregoing provisions, read together as a whole,
consistently reiterate to vendors that there was a firm deadline for technical submissions to be
received and, further, that late submissions in response to the RFQ would not be accepted by the
OCFO, with very limited exceptions. In other words, it was clearly the intention of the OCFO to
impose a deadline on submissions in response to the RFQ by repeatedly requiring that offerors
submit proposals by 2:00 p.m. on May 16, 2013. This established deadline in the RFQ is
consistent with governing procurement law which requires contracting agencies to establish
deadlines for submissions in response to an RFQ. D.C. CODE § 2-354.03(f)(2); D.C. Mun. Regs.
tit. 27, § 1615.4(e) (2013).

4
  See D.C. Mun. Regs. tit. 27, §§ 1524.1, 1524.3 (2012); D.C. Mun. Regs. tit. 27, §§ 1627.1, 1627.3 (2013). These
provisions generally provide that bids and proposals received after the time and date designated in the solicitation
are late and cannot be considered by the contracting agency absent limited exceptions.


                                                       -3-
                                                                                    Phoenix Capital Partners, LLC
                                                                                                 CAB No. P-0938

        The protester’s attempt to disregard the unambiguous language in the RFQ imposing a
submission deadline because these submissions are not, in fact, proposals for an actual contract
award is unpersuasive. The RFQ, interpreted as a whole, notified offerors of the District’s clear
intent to impose a firm deadline on its acceptance of technical qualification submissions.
Consequently, based upon a strict reading of the terms of the RFQ alone, the District properly
rejected the protester’s SOQ when it was delivered after the submission deadline.

         Moreover, in further addressing the protester’s general contention that the SOQ should
not be treated the same as a late proposal for a contract award requiring rejection, we also look to
our federal bid protest tribunal counterpart, the Government Accountability Office (“GAO”), for
guidance. In analogous situations, GAO case law has applied the well-established rule generally
requiring rejection of late proposals to contract related submissions other than bids and proposals
for a contract award. See, e.g., Nw. Heritage Consultants, B-299547, 2007 CPD ¶ 93 at 4 (May
10, 2007) (applying the late proposal rule in finding that agency properly declined to accept
Architect-Engineer (“A-E”) Qualification Statements submitted after deadline)5; Zebra Techs.
Int’l, LLC, B-296158, 2005 CPD ¶ 122 at 3 (June 24, 2005) (applying the late proposal rule to
past performance submissions in holding that protester’s late submission was properly rejected
by the agency given the solicitation’s mandatory requirement for an earlier submission date). In
the foregoing cases, GAO opined as to the necessity of applying the late proposal rule to other
material procurement related submissions, that are not proposals, primarily to alleviate
confusion, ensure equal treatment of all competitors, and prevent any unfair competitive
advantage that might accrue where only one firm is allowed additional time to prepare its
submission. Id. We are persuaded by GAO’s reasoning in this regard, as applied to the instant
case, and find that it would also be unfair to the other offerors in this disputed procurement to
allow the protester additional time to prepare and submit its response to the RFQ where all
offerors responding to the RFQ were equally notified in advance of the submission deadline and
all but the protester complied with this requirement.

         Thus, while the protester argues that public policy considerations require that the OCFO
accept its late SOQ submission, we find the opposite to be the case. Specifically, our case law
has long held that a prospective contractor bears the responsibility for ensuring timely delivery of
its bid or proposal. See, e.g., Tri Gas & Oil Co., CAB No. P-867, 2010 WL 5776583 at *2 (Dec.
10, 2010); Ctr. on Juvenile & Criminal Justice, CAB No. P-488, 44 D.C. Reg. 6834, 6836 (June
16, 1997). Indeed, the Board has recognized that a contrary rule, which would allow a
prospective contractor to file a late bid or proposal by even a few minutes, would inevitably lead
to unequal treatment and subvert the procurement process. Denville Line Painting, Inc., CAB
No. P-292, 40 D.C. Reg. 4640, 4643 (Oct. 22, 1992); Prison Health Servs., Inc., CAB No. P-610,
48 D.C. Reg. 1540, 1544 (May 24, 2000) (quoting Unitron Eng’g Co., 58 Comp. Gen. 748, 749
(1979)). Accordingly, we have stated that although the government may lose the benefit of a
more advantageous proposal under this late submission rule, maintaining the integrity of the
procurement process is of more importance than any advantageous terms the government may
receive by considering a late proposal in any single procurement. Denville Line Painting, Inc.,


5
  Similar to the present protester, the protester in Northwest Heritage Consultants unsuccessfully argued that since
its submissions were not proposals for a contract award, but merely A-E Statements, acceptance and evaluation of its
submission despite its late receipt caused no hardship to other offerors. Id.


                                                       -4-
                                                                                    Phoenix Capital Partners, LLC
                                                                                                 CAB No. P-0938

CAB No. P-292, 40 D.C. Reg. at 4643. Hence, given this precedent, we reject the protester’s
contention that the District violated public policy by disqualifying its late SOQ.

        Lastly, the parties dispute the applicability of the CPO’s procurement regulations
encompassing the late proposal rules, to the OCFO. The protester argues that the OCFO’s
statutory exemption from the CPO’s authority also exempts the OCFO from the late proposal
rules promulgated by the CPO as codified in title 27 of the District of Columbia Municipal
Regulations.6 (Protester Comments 5.) However, we find it unnecessary to opine on the matter
of the applicability of CPO’s procurement regulations, in particular, to the procuring agency as
the Board has otherwise found that the terms of the RFQ and procurement law support the
OCFO’s rejection of the protester’s late SOQ submission as set forth above. 7

                                                   CONCLUSION

       For the reasons set forth herein, the Board finds that the District did not violate
procurement law or regulation when it properly rejected the protester’s response to the subject
RFQ due to its untimely submission. The present protest is, therefore, denied.


SO ORDERED.

Date: September 4, 2013                                               /s/ Monica C. Parchment
                                                                      MONICA C. PARCHMENT
                                                                      Administrative Judge

CONCURRING:

/s/ Maxine E. McBean
MAXINE E. MCBEAN
Administrative Judge




6
   Under District statute, the OCFO, though subject to the provisions of the Procurement Practices Reform Act
(“PPRA”), is expressly exempt from the authority of the CPO. D.C. CODE § 2-352.01(b)(1).
7
  The Board notes, nonetheless, that the OCFO itself has acknowledged the procurement regulations codified in title
27 of the District of Columbia Municipal Regulations govern its procurements. See OFFICE OF THE CHIEF FINANCIAL
OFFICER, OFFICE OF CONTRACTS, http://cfo.dc.gov/page/office-contracts (last visited September 4, 2013).



                                                       -5-
                                        Phoenix Capital Partners, LLC
                                                     CAB No. P-0938



Electronic Service:

Edward J. Tolchin
Ira E. Hoffman
Offit Kurman, P.A.
4800 Montgomery Lane, 9th Floor
Bethesda, MD 20814

Robert Schildkraut
Jody Harrington
Assistant Attorneys General
Office of the Attorney General
441 4th Street N.W., 7th Floor
Washington, DC 20001




                                  -6-
