                   DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CONTRACT APPEALS BOARD



PROTEST OF:

FEI CONSTRUCTION COMPANY                                 )
     (A Division of Forney Enterprises, Inc.)            )       CAB No. P-0902
                                                         )
Under Solicitation No. DCFB-2011-B-0167                  )
       (Formerly DCAM-2011-B-0167)                       )


For the Protester: Keith Forney, pro se. For the District of Columbia: Jon Kulish, Assistant Attorney
General, Office of the Attorney General.

Opinion by Administrative Judge Maxine E. McBean with Chief Administrative Judge Marc D. Loud, Sr.
and Administrative Judge Monica C. Parchment concurring.

                                               OPINION
                                          Filing ID #48443291

        Forney Enterprises, Inc. (“FEI” or “protester”) challenged, pre award, the District’s ability to
award a contract to any of the following offerors: Consys, Inc. (“Consys”), Specialty Construction
Management, Inc. (“Specialty Construction”) and Benaka, Inc. (“Benaka”) under Solicitation No. DCFB-
2011-B-0167. The three offerors were all evaluated as lower responsive bidders than protester. Initially,
the protester alleged that each offeror failed to provide one or more required bid documents with its
submission. However, in its Agency Report (“AR”), the District rebutted the protester’s initial protest
grounds by showing that Consys, the lowest bidder and proposed contract awardee, had, in fact, submitted
the disputed documents. Subsequently, FEI submitted two supplemental protests to challenge Consys for
allegedly being nonresponsive due to the inadequacy of its subcontracting plan and its failure to meet
certain work experience requirements set forth in section L.23 of the Solicitation. The District responded
with a supplemental AR to explain that the proposed awardee had met each of the requirements at issue.
Protester did not file comments to, or otherwise contradict, the District’s supplemental AR thereby
conceding the factual allegations therein. Those allegations support a finding that Consys was the lowest
evaluated responsive and responsible bidder.

         The record before the Board shows that the contracting officer reasonably determined that Consys
submitted the lowest responsive and responsible bid. Finding no evidence to support protester’s
allegations and, therefore, no violation of procurement law or regulation on the part of the District, the
Board denies the instant protest.

                                                BACKGROUND

       On August 24, 2011, the District’s Department of General Services (“DGS”) issued IFB No.
DCFB-2011-B-01671 (“IFB” or “Solicitation”) on behalf of the Fire and Emergency Medical Services
Department. (See AR at Ex. 1.) The IFB sought a contractor to “provide all labor, materials, equipment
and supervision for the complete renovation and modernization of Engine Company No. 28 . . . and

1
 The IFB was originally issued by the Department of Real Estate Services, predecessor to the Department of
General Services, as No. DCAM-2011-B-0167. (AR at Ex. 5, ¶ 2.)
                                                                                 FEI Construction Company
                                                                                          CAB No. P-0902

Engine Company No. 29.” (AR at Ex. 1, § B.1.) The IFB was designated for the Open Market with a
35% SBE subcontracting set aside for contracts over $250,000. (AR at Ex. 1, § B.2.) The IFB was
revised six times prior to the deadline for receipt of proposals. The revisions are as follows: (i) on
August 24, 2011, (Amendment No. 0001), the pre-bid conference date was changed; (ii) on September 14,
2011, (Amendment No. 002), the IFB number was changed, responses to questions by prospective
bidders were provided and attached to the IFB, and certain sections of the IFB were amended; (iii) on
October 7, 2011, (Amendment No. 003), the bid opening date was extended from October 11, 2011, to
October 17, 2011; (iv) on October 13, 2011, (Amendment No. 004), the bid opening date was extended to
November 7, 2011; (v) on November 7, 2011, (Amendment No. 005), the bid opening date was again
extended to November 21, 2011; and (vi) on October 18, 2011, (Amendment No. 006), four attachments
were added to the Solicitation including answers to additional questions from prospective bidders,
additional specifications, and Special Responsibility Standards under Section L.23. (AR at Ex. 2.)

Relevant Terms of the IFB

       Section B.2 of the IFB required a 35% SBE subcontracting set aside for contracts over $250,000.

       § B.2            A bidder responding to this solicitation, unless exempted by
                        Section H.13, must submit with its bid, a notarized statement
                        detailing its subcontracting plan. Bidders responding to this IFB
                        shall be deemed nonresponsive if and shall be rejected if the
                        bidder fails to submit a subcontracting plan that is required by
                        law. For construction contracts in excess of $250,000, at least
                        35% of the dollar volume of the contract shall be subcontracted in
                        accordance with Section H.13. The Subcontracting Plan shall
                        meet the requirements described under Section H.17 of this
                        solicitation.

       (AR at Ex. 1.)

        Section H.13 entitled “Mandatory Subcontracting Requirement” expands on this
requirement:

       § H.13.1         For contracts in excess of $250,000.00, at least 35% of the dollar
                        volume shall be subcontracted to certified small business
                        enterprises; provided, however, that the costs of materials, goods,
                        and supplies shall not be counted towards the 35% subcontracting
                        requirement unless such materials, goods, and supplies are
                        purchased from certified small business enterprises.

       § H.13.2         If there are insufficient qualified small business enterprises to
                        completely fulfill the requirement of paragraph H.13.1, then the
                        subcontracting may be satisfied by subcontracting 35% of the
                        dollar volume to any certified business enterprises; provided,
                        however, that all reasonable efforts shall be made to ensure that
                        qualified small business enterprises are significant participants in
                        the overall subcontracting work.

       (AR at Ex. 1.)

       Section H.17 details the requirements of a responsive subcontracting plan, stating most pertinently

                                                    2
                                                                                 FEI Construction Company
                                                                                          CAB No. P-0902

that failure to submit a compliant subcontracting plan would result in the bid being nonresponsive:

                The prime contractor responding to this solicitation which is required to
                subcontract shall be required to submit with its bid, a notarized statement
                detailing its subcontracting plan. Bids responding to this IFB shall be
                deemed nonresponsive and shall be rejected if the bidder is required to
                subcontract in accordance with the provisions of Section H.13, H.14 or
                H.15, but fails to submit a subcontracting plan with its bid.

        (AR at Ex. 1.)

         Section L.23 – Special Standards of Responsibility – required offerors to demonstrate that they or
their subcontractors had particular experience in the areas of placement of formwork, steel reinforcement,
and masonry restoration. Section L.23, as revised by Amendment 0006, contains the following language:

        § L.23.6         For the cast-in-place requirement the contractor or its
                         subcontractor shall provide evidence with its bid that it or its
                         subcontractor specializes in placement of formwork, reinforcing
                         steel, and concrete with a minimum of 3 years experience on
                         projects of similar size and scope.

        § L.23.7         For clay masonry restoration and cleaning the contractor or its
                         subcontractor shall provide evidence with its bid that it or its
                         subcontractor is an experienced, preapproved masonry
                         restoration and cleaning firm. Evidence that the company has
                         completed work similar in material, design, and extent to that
                         indicated for this Project with a record of successful in-service
                         performance. Experience installing standard unit masonry is not
                         sufficient experience for masonry restoration work.

        § L.23.8         Bids submitted in response to this IFB shall be deemed non-
                         responsible and shall be rejected of [sic] the bidder fails to
                         submit with its bid the above information required by Paragraph
                         L.23.
        (AR at Ex. 2.)

Bid Evaluations and the Protest

         On November 21, 2011, DGS publicly opened the eight bids that it received in response to the
IFB. (AR at Ex. 5, ¶ 7.) During the bid opening process, “bid prices were publicly read out aloud and
recorded on the Bid Tabulation Sheet.” (Id.; see also AR at Ex. 4.) Also during the public opening,
LSDBE/CBE (Certified Business Enterprise) preference points for each bidder were recorded and the
appropriate percentage reductions were applied to calculate the evaluated prices. (AR at Ex. 5, ¶ 7.) The
District determined that Consys was the lowest responsive bidder after the appropriate price reductions
were applied. (See AR at Ex. 4.) Specialty Construction and Benaka were ranked second and third,
respectively. (AR at Ex. 4.)

         FEI filed the instant protest with the Board on November 23, 2011, in advance of the actual
award notification by the District, to challenge any award to Consys, Specialty Construction or Benaka.
(Protest 1, Nov. 23, 2011.) The District responded by filing the AR on December 15, 2011. Protester
filed a Supplemental Protest on December 16, 2011, (Project Award Protest – Supplemental [hereinafter

                                                    3
                                                                                  FEI Construction Company
                                                                                           CAB No. P-0902

1st Supplemental Protest]), and a Supplemental Submission II on January 17, 2012, (Project Award
Protest – Supplemental Submission II [hereinafter 2nd Supplemental Protest]). The District filed a
Supplemental AR in opposition to the first and second supplemental protests. (District’s Supplemental
AR in Opp’n to First and Second Supplemental Protests and Protest of FEI Constr. Co. dated Jan. 23,
2012 [hereinafter Supplemental AR].) Protester did not file comments to the Supplemental AR.

       On February 15, 2012, the District completed its evaluation of the “responsibility of Consys
pursuant to IFB Section L.22 Standards of Responsibility, and L.23 Special Standards of Responsibility”
and found that Consys, the proposed awardee, had the capacity to perform the contract. (Letter to the
Board, Feb. 16, 2012.) The District then filed a “Determination and Findings of Responsibility” on
February 16, 2012, and a “Determination and Findings to Proceed with Contract Award While a Protest is
Pending” on March 15, 2012, (together, the “D&Fs”). Protester did not file comments challenging the
D&Fs.
                                           DISCUSSION

       We exercise jurisdiction over this protest and its underlying allegations pursuant to D.C. Code §
2-360.03(a)(1) (2011).

        In its initial protest, FEI alleged that Consys, Specialty Construction and Benaka had failed to
include one or more documents that each offeror was required to submit with its bid. (Protest 1.) In
particular, FEI cited the requirement for a subcontracting plan in Section B.2 and the requirement for cast-
in-place and masonry restoration experience in Section L.23. (Id.) However, after FEI filed the protest,
the District’s responding AR indicated that Consys had, in fact, submitted a subcontracting plan and other
documents to establish its compliance with Section L.23. (AR 5, ¶ 11, AR 7.) According to the District,
DGS was processing Consys, as the lowest responsible bidder, for contract award. (AR 4, ¶ 8.)

        As a result, FEI subsequently challenged any contract award to Consys specifically. (See 1st
Supplemental Protest.) And, although it no longer asserted that Consys had failed to include a
subcontracting plan in its bid, the protester nonetheless alleged that the inadequacy of the subcontracting
plan rendered Consys’ bid nonresponsive. (Id.) For example, protester contended that Consys’
subcontracting plan (i) consisted of unrealistic pricing for the interior renovation work, (ii) included
subcontractors for demolition and waste management that were not properly certified to perform the
proposed work, (iii) was mathematically unsustainable, and (iv) was not certified due to the absence of a
notary seal. (1st Supplemental Protest 1-2; 2nd Supplemental Protest, ¶ 1.a.) In addition, protester alleged
that Consys failed to meet the special standards of responsibility under Amendment 6 which required
each bidder to demonstrate that its designated subcontractor possessed “a minimum of three years’
experience on projects of similar size and scope for cast-in-place concrete.” (1st Supplemental Protest 3;
2nd Supplemental Protest, ¶ 1.b.) Because protester has ceded one of its initial protest grounds by
acknowledging that Consys had submitted a subcontracting plan, the Board’s review of the record is
therefore narrowed to the remainder of protester’s allegations concerning (A) the adequacy of Consys’
subcontracting plan, including whether it was properly certified, and (B) Consys’ compliance with the
requirements set forth in Section L.23 of the IFB.

       The Board notes that protester has not filed an opposition to the Supplemental AR or challenged
the D&Fs. The Board rules provide, in pertinent part:

        307.3           Failure of the protester to file comments, or to file a statement
                        requesting the case be decided on the existing record, or to
                        request an extension of the time for filing, shall result in the
                        closing of the record of the case and may result in dismissal of
                        the protest.

                                                     4
                                                                                   FEI Construction Company
                                                                                            CAB No. P-0902


        307.4            When a protester fails to file comments on an Agency Report,
                         factual allegations in the Agency Report’s statement of facts not
                         otherwise contradicted by the protester, or the documents in the
                         record, may be treated by the Board as conceded.

       Pursuant to Board Rule 307.4, we will therefore treat as conceded statements of facts in the
Supplemental AR not otherwise contradicted by the protester or by any other documents in the record.

A.   The Subcontracting Plan

        FEI claimed that the subcontracting plan submitted by Consys as part of its bid was
mathematically unsustainable, incomplete, and failed to satisfy the Solicitation’s CBE requirement. (1st
Supplemental Protest 1-2.) Since the District determined Consys to be the lowest responsive bidder,
protester is therefore challenging the validity of the District’s evaluation of the bids. “In reviewing a
protest which challenges the propriety of an agency’s evaluation of proposals, it is not the function of the
Board to independently evaluate proposals and to substitute the Board’s judgment for that of the agency.”
Emergency Assocs. of Physician’s Assistants & Nurse Practitioners, Inc., CAB No. P-0500, 46 D.C. Reg.
8527, 8532 (Dec. 15, 1998). However, we will “examine the record to determine whether the judgment
was reasonable and in accord with the evaluation criteria listed in the solicitation and whether there were
any violations of procurement laws or regulations.” Health Right, Inc., D.C. Health Coop., Inc., & The
George Washington Univ., CAB Nos. P-0507, P-0510, P-0511, 45 D.C. Reg. 8612, 8635 (Oct. 15, 1997);
Trifax, Corp., CAB No. P-0539, 45 D.C. Reg. 8842, 8847 (Sept. 25, 1998). Yet, “the protester has the
burden of affirmatively proving its case and the fact that the protester does not agree with the agency’s
technical conclusions does not itself render the evaluation unreasonable.” Emergency Assocs. of
Physician’s Assistants & Nurse Practitioners, Inc., CAB No. P-0500, 46 D.C. Reg. at 8532.

         In this case, protester’s allegations concerning the acceptability of Consys’ subcontracting plan
have been refuted by the District in its initial AR and the subsequent Supplemental AR. First, protester’s
assertion that Consys had failed to include a subcontracting plan in its bid was disproven by the District in
the initial AR. (See AR 5, 7.) Second, in the Supplemental AR, the District explained that Consys was
deemed responsible having satisfied the relevant CBE subcontracting requirements. (See Supplemental
AR 6-12.) And, inasmuch as FEI failed to provide the Board with comments to the District’s
Supplemental AR, or evidence contradicting it, protester failed to meet its burden of affirmatively proving
that Consys’ subcontracting plan did not satisfy the Solicitation’s requirements. As a consequence, the
Board will treat as conceded the District’s factual allegations in the Supplemental AR, including the
finding of adequacy regarding Consys’ subcontracting plan.

         FEI has also alleged that Consys’ bid was not properly notarized and therefore not properly
certified. In fact, protester specifically questioned the expiration date of the notary’s commission in
Consys’ bid. (2nd Supplemental Protest ¶ 1.a.ii.3.) The bid was notarized by Ms. Kelly Hayes and,
according to the certificate of appointment, the State of Maryland issued her a commission effective
October 12, 2010, through October 12, 2014. (AR at Ex. 9.) As such, Ms. Hayes’ commission was
inarguably valid when she notarized Consys’ bid. For the aforementioned reasons, the Board denies
FEI’s protest grounds concerning both the adequacy and certification of Consys’ subcontracting plan.

B. Special Standards of Responsibility

       The protester has claimed that in order to meet the IFB’s cast-in-place experience requirement,
Consys relied on a subcontractor that does not have the requisite experience on projects of similar size


                                                     5
                                                                                         FEI Construction Company
                                                                                                  CAB No. P-0902

and scope. (2nd Supplemental Protest ¶ 1.b.ii.) FEI therefore asserts that Consys must be deemed
nonresponsive2 for failing to meet the IFB’s special standards of responsibility. (Id.)

        We have held that definitive responsibility criteria or special standards of responsibility are
specific and objective standards designed to measure a prospective contractor’s ability to perform the
contract. M.C. Dean, CAB No. P-0505, 45 D.C. Reg. 8664, 8669 (Dec. 3, 1997). As a result, “[w]here
an allegation is made that definitive responsibility criteria have not been satisfied, we will review the
record to ascertain whether evidence of compliance has been submitted from which the contracting officer
could reasonably conclude that definitive criteria have been met.” (Id.) In Cent. Armature/Fort Meyer
Joint Venture, CAB No. P-0478, 44 D.C. Reg. 6823, 6828-29 (June 6, 1997), the Board clearly stated the
scope of the Board’s review of a responsibility determination involving special standards of
responsibility.

                 It is well settled that the Board will not overturn an affirmative
                 responsibility determination unless a protester can show fraud or bad
                 faith on the part of the contracting officials, a bidder’s failure to adhere
                 to definitive responsibility criteria, or that such a determination lacked
                 any reasonable basis. A contracting agency has broad discretion in
                 determining whether bidders meet definitive responsibility criteria since
                 the agency must bear the burden of any difficulties experiences in
                 obtaining the required performance. When a solicitation contains
                 definitive responsibility criteria, which are specific and objective
                 standards established by an agency to measure a bidder’s ability to
                 perform a particular contract, the agency must obtain evidence that the
                 bidder meets those criteria.

                                                       ***

                 The scope of our review is focused on ascertaining whether evidence of
                 compliance has been submitted from which the contracting officer
                 reasonably could conclude that the definitive responsibility criteria had
                 been met. The relative quality of the evidence is a matter for the
                 judgment of the contracting officer. Nevertheless, we also insist on the
                 presence of objective evidence demonstrating compliance with the
                 definitive responsibility criteria.

                 Id.

         The IFB stated that “[f]or the cast-in-place requirement the contractor or its subcontractor shall
provide evidence with its bid that it or its subcontractor specializes in placement of formwork, reinforcing
steel, and concrete with a minimum of 3 years’ experience on projects of similar size and scope.” (AR at
Ex. 2 § L.23.6.) Consys proposed G & D Construction, LLC (“G&D”) as its subcontractor for all cast-in-
place work and provided three past performance evaluations of G&D. (AR at Ex. 13C, at Exs. 16,17.)


2
  Protester describes this alleged deficiency as an issue of responsiveness because it claims that Consys failed to
submit the required documentation under Section L.23. (See 2nd Supplemental Protest ¶ 1.b.ii.) However, Section
L.23.8 describes the above as a responsibility matter. The Board has also clarified that information concerning
contractor experience and the ability to perform fully the contract requirements relate to bidder responsibility, not
bidder responsiveness. See Space Master Internat’l, Inc., CAB No. P-0380-A, 41 D.C. Reg. 3687, 3689 (Oct. 20,
1993).

                                                         6
                                                                                   FEI Construction Company
                                                                                            CAB No. P-0902

The performance evaluations provided evidence that G&D has been performing cast-in-place work from,
at least, May 2008 to January 2012.

        Based on the foregoing,3 the contracting officer’s conclusion that Consys’ bid satisfied the
experience requirements set forth in Section L.23.6 was reasonable. Moreover, since the protester has not
alleged or established fraud or bad faith on the part of the contracting officer, there is no basis for this
Board to invalidate the contracting officer’s responsibility determination of Consys.

                                              CONCLUSION

        The Board finds that the protester has not shown that the contracting officer wrongly determined
that Consys submitted the lowest responsive and responsible bid to the Solicitation. Having found no
violation of procurement law or regulation on the part of the District, we deny the instant protest.

        SO ORDERED.

DATED: December 14, 2012                                           /s/ Maxine E. McBean
                                                                   MAXINE E. MCBEAN
                                                                   Administrative Judge

CONCURRING:

/s/ Marc D. Loud, Sr.
MARC D. LOUD, SR.
Chief Administrative Judge

/s/ Monica C. Parchment
MONICA C. PARCHMENT
Administrative Judge


Electronic Service:

Mr. Keith Forney
President
Forney Enterprises, Inc.
1818 New York Avenue, N.E., Suite 201
Washington, D.C. 20002

Jon N. Kulish
Assistant Attorney General
Office of the Attorney General
441 4th Street, N.W., Suite 700
Washington, D.C. 20001


3
  Protester has also alleged that TPM Group, LLC (Consys’ proposed subcontractor for demolition and waste
management) lacks the requisite demolition and waste management experience to meet its obligations under the
subcontracting plan. (1st Supplemental Protest ¶ 1.b.) However, waste management and demolition are not listed
under Section L.23 as tasks requiring any specific certification or work experience.


                                                      7
