                GOVERNMENT OF THE DISTRICf OF COLUMBIA
                       CONTRACf APPFALS BOARD



PROTEST OF:

      IMPEX INTERNATIONAL INDUSTRIES, INC.                    )
                                                              )        CAB No. P-146
      Under IFB No. 9081-AA-99-0-9-RS                         )


      For the Protester: Tao. Eniola, President. For the District of Columbia: Lorilyn
E. Simkins, Assistant Corporation Counsel, D.C.

      Opinion by Administrative Judge Marlin with Administrative Judges Booker and
Davis concurring.

                                    BACKGROUND

       On November 18, 1988, the District's Department of Administrative Services
(DAS) issued the above-referenced Invitation for Bids (IFB) in the sheltered market in
order to obtain tree trimming services. The bids were opened on December 20, 1988.
DAS received three bids, including a bid from Impex International Industries, Inc.
(Impex), the protester. Agency Report at 1 and Attachment 3.

       On or about December 20, 1988, Impex was notified by DAS that its bid had been
rejected as nonresponsive because it was not certified as a minority business by the
District agency responsible for such a determination, the Minority Business Opportunity
Commission (MBOC). Id. at 2 and Attachment 1.

       In its letter of protest, filed with the Board on December 23, 1988, Impex admits
that it was not a certified minority business enterprise (MBE) at the time of bid
opening.

       Impex asserts, however, that its lack of certification as an MBE is the fault of the
District and it should not be penalized by having its bid deemed nonresponsive. Impex
claims that it filed an application for certification on November 9, 1988 but the MBOC
misplaced the documents, thereby preventing certification in time for the bid opening on
December 20, 1988. Impex further asserts that it is a minority owned and operated
business in Maryland and Delaware. See protest letter, infra.
                                                                                            --
                                          -2-


                                       OPINION

       The fact that Impex was not certified as a MBE by the MBOC at the time the
bids were opened on December 20, 1988, deprives the Board of jurisdiction to consider
this protest.

       Under District law, the MBOC issues certificates of registration to qualifying
business firms who apply for eligibility for sheltered market procurements. Minority
Contracting Act of 1976, D.C. Code, ยง 1-1148 (1987). We have ruled that the MBOC has
exclusive authority to certify minority business enterprises and that the Board does not
have jurisdiction to hear challenges to the certification process. Southern International
Corporation (D.C. CAB, February 27, 1987).

       The certification of Impex as a minority firm in Maryland and Delaware does not
provide eligibility in the District. Only certification in the District of Columbia
establishes a business as an MBE with the right to compete for District government
procurements. See Aceves Construction Maintenance Company (D.C. CAB, March 10,
1987).Y

        It is ORDERED that the protest be dismissed for lack of jurisdiction.


DATE:     June 14, 1989                                      CVcv;.; I). (1~
                                                              DAVID H. MARLIN
                                                              Administrative Judge

CONCUR:


 Q}(lvJ~3~H
CLAUDIA D. BOOKER
Administrative Judge


LJJL' t/j~ -
WILLIAM L. DAVIS
Chief Administrative Judge



 !IThe disposition of this case on jurisdictional grounds makes it unnecessary to
consider the merits of the protest.
